
		From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
		
		
		
		
		Jump to navigation
		Jump to search
		Comic performer often for children's entertainment
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}This article is about the comic performer. For other uses, see Clown (disambiguation).


.mw-parser-output .infobox-subbox{padding:0;border:none;margin:-3px;width:auto;min-width:100%;font-size:100%;clear:none;float:none;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .infobox-3cols-child{margin:auto}ClownClown PerformerMediumPhysical comedy, acting, mimeTypescircus, contemporary circus, comedy, theatre, television, filmAncestor artsJesterDescendant artsHarlequinade, comedianOriginating era18th – 21st century
.mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:22em;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em;background:#f8f9fa;border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.2em;text-align:center;line-height:1.4em;font-size:88%;border-collapse:collapse;display:table}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .sidebar{display:table!important;float:right!important;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em!important}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-subgroup{width:100%;margin:0;border-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-left{float:left;clear:left;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-none{float:none;clear:both;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-outer-title{padding:0 0.4em 0.2em;font-size:125%;line-height:1.2em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-image{padding:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-caption,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle-with-top-image,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-caption{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle{padding:0.4em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.2em 0.8em;font-size:145%;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-image{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-heading{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content{padding:0 0.5em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content-with-subgroup{padding:0.1em 0.4em 0.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-below{padding:0.3em 0.8em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-below{border-top:1px solid #aaa;border-bottom:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-navbar{text-align:right;font-size:115%;padding:0 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:left;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.6em;font-size:105%}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title-c{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:center;margin:0 3.3em}@media(max-width:720px){body.mediawiki .mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:100%!important;clear:both;float:none!important;margin-left:0!important;margin-right:0!important}}Part of a series onPerforming arts
Acrobatics
Ballet
Circus skills
Clown
Dance
Gymnastics
Magic
Mime
Music
Opera
Professional wrestling
Puppetry
Speech
Stand-up comedy
Theatre
Ventriloquism
.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vte
A clown is a person who wears a unique makeup-face and flamboyant costume, performing comedy in a state of open-mindedness (by reversing folkway-norms) all while using physical comedy.[1][2][3][4] 

Contents

1 History

1.1 Origin
1.2 Modern circus clown
1.3 History in 20th-century North America


2 Principal types

2.1 Circus clown
2.2 Pierrot and Harlequin
2.3 White clown and Auguste
2.4 Whiteface makeup
2.5 Character clown


3 Clown organizations
4 Clowning terminology

4.1 Roles and skills
4.2 Frameworks
4.3 Gags, bits and business
4.4 Menu
4.5 Interludes
4.6 Prop stunts


5 Gallery
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 External links



History
The most ancient clowns have been found in the Fifth Dynasty of Egypt, around 2400 BC.[5] Unlike court jesters,[dubious  – discuss] clowns have traditionally served a socio-religious and psychological role, and traditionally[when?] the roles of priest and clown have been held by the same persons.[5]
Peter Berger writes, "It seems plausible that folly and fools, like religion and magic, meet some deeply rooted needs in human society."[6] For this reason, clowning is often considered an important part of training as a physical performance discipline, partly because tricky subject matter can be dealt with, but also because it requires a high level of risk and play in the performer.[7]
In anthropology, the term clown has been extended to comparable jester or fool characters in non-Western cultures. A society in which such clowns have an important position are termed clown societies, and a clown character involved in a religious or ritual capacity is known as a ritual clown.[8][9][10]
In Native American mythology, the Trickster channels the spirit of the Coyote and becomes a sacred Clown character. A Heyoka is an individual in Native cultures who lives outside the constraints of normal cultural roles, playing the role of a backwards clown by doing everything in reverse. The Heyoka role is sometimes best filled by a Winkte.
Many native tribes have a history of clowning. The Canadian clowning method developed by Richard Pochinko and furthered by his former apprentice, Sue Morrison, combines European and Native American clowning techniques. In this tradition, masks are made of clay while the creator's eyes are closed. A mask is made for each direction of the medicine wheel. During this process, the clown creates a personal mythology that explores their personal experiences.

Play media  Video of a 1954 episode of the Super Circus show
Modern clowns are strongly associated with the tradition of the circus clown, which developed out of earlier comedic roles in theatre or Varieté shows during the 19th to mid 20th centuries. This recognizable character features outlandish costumes, distinctive makeup, colorful wigs, exaggerated footwear, and colorful clothing, with the style generally being designed to entertain large audiences.[citation needed]
The first mainstream clown role was portrayed by Joseph Grimaldi (who also created the traditional whiteface make-up design). In the early 1800s, he expanded the role of Clown in the harlequinade that formed part of British pantomimes, notably at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane and the Sadler's Wells and Covent Garden theatres. He became so dominant on the London comic stage that harlequinade Clowns became known as "Joey", and both the nickname and Grimaldi's whiteface make-up design are still used by other clowns.
The comedy that clowns perform is usually in the role of a fool whose everyday actions and tasks become extraordinary—and for whom the ridiculous, for a short while, becomes ordinary. This style of comedy has a long history in many countries and cultures across the world. Some writers have argued that due to the widespread use of such comedy and its long history it is a need that is part of the human condition.[citation needed]

Origin
The clown character developed out of the zanni rustic fool characters of the early modern commedia dell'arte, which were themselves directly based on the rustic fool characters of ancient Greek and Roman theatre. Rustic buffoon characters in Classical Greek theater were known as sklêro-paiktês (from paizein: to play (like a child)) or deikeliktas, besides other generic terms for rustic or peasant. In Roman theater, a term for clown was fossor, literally digger; labourer.
The English word clown was first recorded c. 1560 (as clowne, cloyne) in the generic meaning rustic, boor, peasant. The origin of the word is uncertain, perhaps from a Scandinavian word cognate with clumsy.[a] It is in this sense that Clown is used as the name of fool characters in Shakespeare's Othello and The Winter's Tale. The sense of clown as referring to a professional or habitual fool or jester developed soon after 1600, based on Elizabethan rustic fool characters such as Shakespeare's.
The harlequinade developed in England in the 17th century, inspired by Arlecchino and the commedia dell'arte. It was here that Clown came into use as the given name of a stock character. Originally a foil for Harlequin's slyness and adroit nature, Clown was a buffoon or bumpkin fool who resembled less a jester than a comical idiot. He was a lower class character dressed in tattered servants' garb.
The now-classical features of the clown character were developed in the early 1800s by Joseph Grimaldi, who played Clown in Charles Dibdin's 1800 pantomime Peter Wilkins: or Harlequin in the Flying World at Sadler's Wells Theatre, where Grimaldi built the character up into the central figure of the harlequinade.[12][13]

Modern circus clown
Main article: Circus clown
The circus clown developed in the 19th century. The modern circus derives from Philip Astley's London riding school, which opened in 1768. Astley added a clown to his shows to amuse the spectators between equestrian sequences. American comedian George L. Fox became known for his clown role, directly inspired by Grimaldi, in the 1860s.
Tom Belling senior (1843–1900) developed the red clown or Auguste (Dummer August) character c. 1870, acting as a foil for the more sophisticated white clown. Belling worked for Circus Renz in Vienna. Belling's costume became the template for the modern stock character of circus or children's clown, based on a lower class or hobo character, with red nose, white makeup around the eyes and mouth, and oversized clothes and shoes. The clown character as developed by the late 19th century is reflected in Ruggero Leoncavallo's 1892 opera Pagliacci (Clowns).
Belling's Auguste character was further popularized by Nicolai Poliakoff's Coco in the 1920s to 1930s.
The English word clown was borrowed, along with the circus clown act, by many other languages, such as French clown, Russian (and other Slavic languages) кло́ун, Greek κλόουν, Danish/Norwegian klovn, Romanian clovn etc.
Italian retains Pagliaccio, a Commedia dell'arte zanni character,[b] and derivations of the Italian term are found in other Romance languages, such as French Paillasse, Spanish payaso, Catalan/Galician pallasso, Portuguese palhaço, Greek παλιάτσος, Turkish palyaço, German Pajass (via French)[14] Yiddish פּאַיאַץ (payats), Russian пая́ц, Romanian paiață.

History in 20th-century North America
In the early 20th century, with the disappearance of the rustic simpleton or village idiot character of everyday experience, North American circuses developed characters such as the tramp or hobo. Examples include Marceline Orbes, who performed at the Hippodrome Theater(1905), Charlie Chaplin's The Tramp (1914), and Emmett Kelly's Weary Willie based on hobos of the Depression era. Another influential tramp character was played by Otto Griebling during the 1930s to 1950s. Red Skelton's Dodo the Clown in The Clown (1953), depicts the circus clown as a tragicomic stock character, "a funny man with a drinking problem".[citation needed]
In the United States, Bozo the Clown was an influential Auguste character since the late 1950s. The Bozo Show premiered in 1960 and appeared nationally on cable television in 1978. McDonald's derived its mascot clown, Ronald McDonald, from the Bozo character in the 1960s. Willard Scott, who had played Bozo during 1959–1962, performed as the mascot in 1963 television spots. The McDonald's trademark application for the character dates to 1967.
Based on the Bozo template, the US custom of birthday clown, private contractors who offer to perform as clowns at children's parties, developed in the 1960s to 1970s. The strong association of the (Bozo-derived) clown character with children's entertainment as it has developed since the 1960s also gave rise to Clown Care or hospital clowning in children's hospitals by the mid 1980s. Clowns of America International (established 1984) and World Clown Association (established 1987) are associations of semi-professionals and professional performers.
The shift of the Auguste or red clown character from his role as a foil for the white in circus or pantomime shows to a Bozo-derived standalone character in children's entertainment by the 1980s also gave rise to the evil clown character, with the attraction of clowns for small children being based in their fundamentally threatening or frightening nature.[c] The fear of clowns, particularly circus clowns, has become known by the term "coulrophobia."[19]

Principal types
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (June 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
There are different types of clowns portrayed around the world. They include

.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
Auguste
Blackface
Buffoon
Harlequin
Jester
Mime artist
Pierrot
Pueblo
Rodeo clown
Tramp
Whiteface

Circus clown
Further information: Circus clown
Pierrot and Harlequin
Further information: Harlequinade
The classical pairing of the White Clown with Auguste in modern tradition
has a precedent in the pairing of Pierrot and Harlequin in the Commedia dell'arte.
Originally, Harlequin's role was that of a light-hearted, nimble and astute servant, paired with the sterner and melancholic Pierrot.
In the 18th-century English Harlequinade, Harlequin was now paired with Clown.
As developed by Joseph Grimaldi around 1800, Clown became the mischievous and brutish foil for the more sophisticated Harlequin, who became more of a romantic character. The most influential such pair in Victorian England were the Payne Brothers, active during the 1860s and 1870s.

White clown and Auguste
  Les Rossyann, white clown and clumsy Auguste from France
The white clown, or clown blanc in French, is a sophisticated character, as opposed to the clumsy Auguste.[20] The two types are also distinguished as the sad clown (blanc) and happy clown (Auguste).[21]
The Auguste face base makeup color is a variation of pink, red, or tan rather than white. Features are exaggerated in size, and are typically red and black in color. The mouth is thickly outlined with white (called the muzzle) as are the eyes. Appropriate to the character, the Auguste can be dressed in either well-fitted garb or a costume that does not fit – oversize or too small, either is appropriate. Bold colors, large prints or patterns, and suspenders often characterize Auguste costumes.
The Auguste character-type is often an anarchist, a joker, or a fool. He is clever and has much lower status than the whiteface. Classically the whiteface character instructs the Auguste character to perform his bidding. The Auguste has a hard time performing a given task, which leads to funny situations. Sometimes the Auguste plays the role of an anarchist and purposefully has trouble following the whiteface's directions. Sometimes the Auguste is confused or is foolish and makes errors less deliberately.
The contra-auguste plays the role of the mediator between the white clown and the Auguste character. He has a lower status than the white clown but a higher status than the Auguste. He aspires to be more like the white clown and often mimics everything the white clown does to try to gain approval. If there is a contra-auguste character, he often is instructed by the whiteface to correct the Auguste when he is doing something wrong.

Whiteface makeup
  G.L. Fox, the original Humpty Dumpty
There are two major types of clowns with whiteface makeup:
The classic white clown is derived from the Pierrot character. His makeup is white, usually with facial features such as eyebrows emphasized in black. He is the more intelligent and sophisticated clown, contrasting with the rude or grotesque Auguste types. Francesco Caroli and Glenn "Frosty" Little are examples of this type. The second type of whiteface is the buffoonish clown of the Bozo type, known as Comedy or Grotesque Whiteface. This type has grotesquely emphasized features, especially a red nose and red mouth, often with partial (mostly red) hair. 
In the comedic partnership of Abbott and Costello, Bud Abbot would have been the classic whiteface and Lou Costello the comedy whiteface or Auguste.[22]
Traditionally, the whiteface clown uses clown white makeup to cover the entire face and neck, leaving none of the underlying natural skin visible.[23] In the European whiteface makeup, the ears are painted red.
Whiteface makeup was originally designed by Joseph Grimaldi in 1801. He began by painting a white base over his face, neck and chest before adding red triangles on the cheeks, thick eyebrows and large red lips set in a mischievous grin. Grimaldi's design is used by many modern clowns. According to Grimaldi's biographer Andrew McConnell Stott, it was one of the most important theatrical designs of the 1800s.[23]
America's first great whiteface clown was stage star George "G.L." Fox. Following English Joseph Grimaldi, Fox popularised the Humpty Dumpty stories throughout the land in the first half of the 19th century in America.

Character clown
The character clown adopts an eccentric character of some type, such as a butcher, a baker, a policeman, a housewife or hobo. Prime examples of this type of clown are the circus tramps Otto Griebling and Emmett Kelly. Red Skelton, Harold Lloyd, Buster Keaton, Charlie Chaplin, Rowan Atkinson and Sacha Baron Cohen would all fit the definition of a character clown.
The character clown makeup is a comic slant on the standard human face. Their makeup starts with a flesh tone base and may make use of anything from glasses, mustaches and beards to freckles, warts, big ears or strange haircuts.
The most prevalent character clown in the American circus is the hobo, tramp or bum clown. There are subtle differences in the American character clown types. The primary differences among these clown types is attitude. According to American circus expert Hovey Burgess,[where?] they are:

The Hobo: Migratory and finds work where he travels. Down on his luck but maintains a positive attitude.
The Tramp: Migratory and does not work where he travels. Down on his luck and depressed about his situation.
The Bum: Non-migratory and non-working.
Clown organizations
The World Clown Association is a worldwide organization for clowns, jugglers, magicians, and face painters. It holds an annual convention, mainly in the United States.
Clowns of America International is a Minnesota-based non-profit clown arts membership organization which aims "to share, educate, and act as a gathering place for serious minded amateurs, semiprofessionals, and professional clowns".

Clowning terminology
Roles and skills
In the circus, a clown might perform other circus roles or skills. Clowns may perform such skills as tightrope, juggling, unicycling, Master of Ceremonies, or ride an animal. Clowns may also "sit in" with the orchestra. Other circus performers may also temporarily stand in for a clown and perform their skills in clown costume.

Frameworks
Frameworks are the general outline of an act that clowns use to help them build out an act.[24] Frameworks can be loose, including only a general beginning and ending to the act, leaving it up to the clown's creativity to fill in the rest, or at the other extreme a fully developed script that allows very little room for creativity.
Shows are the overall production that a clown is a part of, it may or may not include elements other than clowning, such as in a circus show. In a circus context, clown shows are typically made up of some combination of entrées, side dishes, clown stops, track gags, gags and bits.

Gags, bits and business
Business – the individual motions the clown uses, often used to express the clown's character.
Gag – very short piece of clown comedy that, when repeated within a bit or routine, may become a running gag. Gags are, loosely, the jokes clowns play on each other. A gag may have a beginning, a middle, and an end – or may not. Gags can also refer to the prop stunts/tricks or the stunts that clowns use, such as a squirting flower.
Bit – the clown's sketch or routine, made up of one or more gags either worked out and timed before going on stage, or impromptu bits composed of familiar improvisational material
Menu
Entrée — clowning acts lasting 5–10 minutes. Typically made up of various gags and bits, usually within a clowning framework. Entrées almost always end with a blow-off — the comedic ending of a show segment, bit, gag, stunt, or routine.
Side dish — shorter feature act. Side dishes are essentially shorter versions of the entrée, typically lasting 1–3 minutes. Typically made up of various gags and bits, side dishes are usually within a clowning framework. Side dishes almost always end with a blow-off.
Interludes
Clown Stops or interludes are the brief appearances of clowns in a circus while the props and rigging are changed. These are typically made up of a few gags or several bits. Clown stops will always have a beginning, a middle, and an end to them, invariably culminating in a blow-off. These are also called reprises or run-ins by many, and in today's circus they are an art form in themselves. Originally they were bits of business usually parodying the preceding act. If for instance there had been a tightrope walker the reprise would involve two chairs with a piece of rope between and the clown trying to imitate the artiste by trying to walk between them, with the resulting falls and cascades bringing laughter from the audience. Today, interludes are far more complex, and in many modern shows the clowning is a thread that links the whole show together.

Prop stunts
Among the more well-known clown stunts are: squirting flower; the too-many-clowns-coming-out-of-a-tiny-car stunt; doing just about anything with a rubber chicken, tripping over one's own feet (or an air pocket or imaginary blemish in the floor), or riding any number of ridiculous vehicles or clown bikes. Individual prop stunts are generally considered individual bits.

Gallery

		
			
			
Chuchín (José de Jesus Medrano), a famous Mexican circus clown from the late 1960s to 1984

			
		
		
			
			
Actor in a clown costume (c. 1870)

			
		
		
			
			
The Italian Pagliaccio of c. 1600 (Maurice Sand, Masques et bouffons (Comedie Italienne), 1860)

			
		
		
			
			
The French Paillasse character (1885 engraving)

			
		
		
			
			
Joseph Grimaldi as Clown, showing his own make-up design

			
		
		
			
			
A circus clown in an Arm & Hammer Brand Soda advertisement poster (c. 1900)

			
		
		
			
			
Pierrot and Harlequin by Paul Cézanne (1898)

			
		
		
			
			
Smilie The Clown

			
		
		
			
			
Swedish actor Gösta Ekman senior (1890-1938) as a whiteface clown in the play Han som får örfilarna (He Who Gets Slapped) by Leonid Andreyev (1926)

			
		
		
			
			
Typical aspects of an Auguste; white muzzle and eyes (Swedish actor Lasse Beischer [sv] in a performance of 1 2 3 Schtunk [sv], 2008 photograph)

			
		
		
			
			
10-year-old Swedish actress Inger Nilsson during her visit to Helsinki, Finland in February 1970; she is here seen with the Finnish clown Onni Gideon in Helsinki Ice Hall

			
		
		
			
			
1968 postcard, main cast of Bozo's Circus (WGN-TV); left to right, Ringmaster Ned (Ned Locke), Mr. Bob (bandleader Bob Trendler), Bozo the Clown (Bob Bell), Oliver O. Oliver (Ray Rayner), Sandy the Clown (Don Sandburg)

			
		
		
			
			
Aquatic team with clowns at Kirk Kove, 1959

			
		
		
			
			
Toddles The Clown

			
		
		
			
			
Clown at a Memorial Day parade, 2004

			
		
		
			
			
Clown of Dusseldorf

			
		
		
			
			
a person attached or owing service to a household to provide casual entertainment and commonly dressed in motley with cap, bells, and bauble

			
		

See also

List of clowns
Bouffon
Circus clown
Clown bicycle
Clown car
Clown Care
Clown Prince of Crime
Clown society
Circus Knie
Evil clown
Harlequin
Jester
Mime artist
Rodeo clown

Notes
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ Icelandic klunni, Swedish kluns "clumsy, boorish person"; c.f. North Frisian klönne and kluns, also meaning clumsy person. An alternative proposal derives clown from Latin colonus "colonist, farmer". The verb to clown "to play the clown onstage" is from about 1600.[11]

^ From paglia, the word for straw (after the straw costume of the rustic buffoon character), or from bajaccio "mocker, scoffer".

^ 

A study by the University of Sheffield concluded "that clowns are universally disliked by children. Some found them quite frightening and unknowable."[15][16] The natural dislike of clowns makes them effective in eliciting laughter by releasing tension in acting clumsy or rendering themselves helpless.[17][18]


References


^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}Rogers, Phyllis (1980). "My Favorite Foods are Dr Pepper, Collard Greens, and Pizza. I'm sure I'll Be a Good Clown". ScholarlyCommons. Studies in Visual Communication. University of Pennsylvania. 6 (1): 44–45. Retrieved 1 January 2021. Your face was your fortune, and to copy another man's face without his permission was theft, punishable by ostracism. Every man had some kind of special trick which made his makeup look perfect...The old clowns feel that the quickest and easiest way for a person to distinguish between a clown and a person in makeup is the clown's ability to make his face move...The old clowns say that anyone can apply greasepaint to his face but very few practitioners of the art of clowning ever acquire the skill to make their faces move.

^ Butler, Laurel (March 2012). "'Everything seemed new': Clown as Embodied Critical Pedagogy". Theatre Topics. Johns Hopkins University Press. 22 (1): 62. doi:10.1353/tt.2012.0014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 1 January 2021. Italian clown pedagogue Giovanni Fusetti proposes...conceiving of clown as a state of being...'a state of playing where everyone has access to the key question: what is so funny about myself?' Lecoq describes entering into ‘the clown dimension,' which requires 'a state of openness, entirely without defense...a state of reaction and surprise' (146). John Wright...[says] 'the state of bafflement that we see in clown...as a common state of humanity...Clown reminds us that, deep down, we're all in exactly the same bemused state' (218). John Flax (2009)...says that, for Lecoq, 'theatrical clown was just about finding that basic state of vulnerability and allowing the audience to exist in that state with you...A clown state is a state of innocence and poetry and naivety that allows the audience to draw their own conclusions. That’s the state that you bring them to, and they'll make the connections or not, but they love to be in that state because we don't go there very often. It's a state of anti-intellectualism, a kind of pure emotion.'

^ Keisalo, Marianna (24 March 2017). "'Picking People to Hate': Reversible reversals in stand-up comedy". Suomen Antropologi. 41 (4): 62. Retrieved 22 March 2021. Reversals, broadly defined as switching to the opposite of what is considered 'the normal order' ... Reversals are an important aspect of the performance of many ritual clown figures (Keisalo-Galvan 2011; Steward 1991 [1929]) as well as more everyday instances of clowning and humor (e.g., Basso 1979).

^ Double, Oliver (2014) [2005]. "Licence". Getting the Joke: the inner workings of stand-up comedy. Quote by Stewart Lee (2nd ed.). New York: Bloomsbury Methuen Drama. p. 264. ISBN 978-1-4081-7460-9. According to Stewart Lee, 'By reversing the norms and breaking the taboos, the clowns show us what we have to lose, and what we might also stand to gain, if we stand outside the restrictions of social convention and polite everyday discourse.'

^ a b Bala, Michael (Winter 2010). "The Clown: An Archetypal Self-Journey". Jung Journal: Culture & Psyche. 4 (1): 50–71. doi:10.1525/jung.2010.4.1.50. JSTOR 10.1525/jung.2010.4.1.50. S2CID 143703784.

^ Berger 1997, p. 78

^ Callery 2001, p. 64

^ Pollio, Howard (1978-09-14). "What's so funny?". New Scientist. Vol. 79 no. 1120. United Kingdom: Reed Business Information. p. 774. ISSN 0262-4079. Retrieved 2020-05-16.

^ Charles, Lucile Hoerr (Jan–Mar 1945). "The Clown's Function". The Journal of American Folklore. 58 (227): 25–34. doi:10.2307/535333. JSTOR 535333.

^ Edward P. Dozier (1970). The Pueblo Indians of North America. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. p. 202. ISBN 0030787459. LCCN 75114696. OL 5218719M. Retrieved 2020-05-16.

^ "Etymology Dictionary". Retrieved May 6, 2020.

^ Neville 1980, pp. 6–7

^ McConnell Stott 2009, pp. 95–100

^ Dialectal Bajass (in German) in Schweizerisches Idiotikon

^ "Health | Hospital clown images 'too scary'". BBC News. 2008-01-15. Retrieved 2020-05-16.

^ Rohrer, Finlo (2008-01-16). "Why are clowns scary?". BBC News. Retrieved 2020-05-16.

^ Durwin, Joseph (15 November 2004). "Coulrophobia and the Trickster" (pdf). Trickster's Way. San Antonio: Trinity University. 3 (1). ISSN 1538-9030. Retrieved 2020-05-16.

^ Durwin, Joseph. "Coulrophobia and the Trickster". Trinity.edu. Archived from the original on 2011-06-24. Retrieved 2020-05-16.

^ Crosswell, Julia (2009), "clown", The Oxford Dictionary of Word Origins (2nd ed.), Oxford University Press, retrieved May 6, 2020

^ Schechter, Joel (2003). Popular Theatre: A Sourcebook. Worlds of performance. Routledge. p. 139. ISBN 9780415258302. LCCN 2002026941.

^ Berton, Danièle; Simard, Jean-Pierre (2007), Création théâtrale: Adaptation, schèmes, traduction (in French) p. 330

^ McCoy, Tiffany (2010). "Clown Types". Archived from the original on 2015-10-26.

^ a b McConnell Stott 2009, pp. 117–118

^ "Clowning Framework". simplycircus.com. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016.


Bibliography
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents ul,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents ul li{list-style:none}@media(max-width:720px){.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li{padding-left:1.6em;text-indent:-1.6em}}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-columns ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
Berger, Peter L. (1997), Redeeming Laughter: The Comic Dimension of Human Experience, Walter de Gruyter, ISBN 3-11-015562-1
Callery, Dymphna (2001), Through the Body: A Practical Guide to Physical Theatre, Nick Hern Books, ISBN 1-85459-630-6
McConnell Stott, Andrew (2009). The Pantomime Life of Joseph Grimaldi. Edinburgh: Canongate Books Ltd. ISBN 978-1-84767-761-7.
Neville, Giles (1980). Incidents In the Life of Joseph Grimaldi. London: Jonathan Cape Ltd. ISBN 0-224-01869-8.

External links
Quotes by and about Clowns
Collection: "Clowns" from the University of Michigan Museum of Art



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Clowns.




Wikiquote has quotations related to: Clowns

.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox th,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output th.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteClownsList of clownsTypes
Bouffon
Circus
Harlequin
Jester
Mime
Pierrot
Pueblo
Rodeo
Silly Billy
Organizations
World Clown Association
Clown Conservatory
Clowns of America International
The World Festival of Clowns in Yekaterinburg
Related
Evil clown
Loldiers of Odin
Clandestine Insurgent Rebel Clown Army

 Category

vteHumor and wit charactersIndian
Bakor Patel
Birbal
Gonu Jha
Gopal Bhar
Hum Jayega
Miya Fuski
Mullah Do Piaza
Tenali Rama
Other
Abu Abed
Hershel of Ostropol
Hitar Petar
İncili Çavuş
Josef Švejk
Lange Wapper
Nasreddin
Onufry Zagłoba
Păcală
Pedro Urdemales
Till Eulenspiegel
Wonderful Fool
Related subjects
Jester
Wise fool
Clowns

vteStock charactersBy ethics and moralityHeroesClassic hero
Action hero
Christ figure
Everyman
Folk hero
Knight-errant
Legacy hero
Mythological king
Superhero
Youngest son
Antihero
Byronic hero
Man alone
Tragic hero
Other
Cyberhero
Supersoldier
RoguesLovable rogue
Gentleman detective
Jack
Trickster
Tricky slave
Harlequin
Zanni
Outlaw
Bad boy
Gentleman thief
Pirate
Air pirate
Space pirate
Other
Good cop/bad cop
Rake
VillainsAntivillains
False hero
The mole
Double agent
Evil twin
Social Darwinist
Dark lord
Mad scientist
Supervillain
Monsters
Bug-eyed monster
Evil clown
Killer toy
Skeleton
Swamp monster
Vampires
Zombies
Other
Alazon
Archenemy
Folk devil
Igor
Masked Mystery Villain
Miser
By sex and genderFeminineLove interest
Bishōjo
Farmer's daughter
Girl next door
Hooker with a heart of gold
Ingénue
Loosu ponnu
Magical girlfriend
Catgirl
Manic Pixie Dream Girl
Hag
Cat lady
Crone
Fairy godmother
La Ruffiana
Loathly lady
Hawksian woman
Dragon Lady
Femme fatale
Tsundere
Woman warrior
Jungle girl
Magical girl
Queen bee
Princesse lointaine
Southern belle
Valley girl
Yamato nadeshiko
LGBT
Class S
Laotong
Lady-in-waiting
Columbina
Mammy stereotype
Geek girl
Gamer girl
Damsel in distress
Final girl
Princess and dragon
MasculineHarlequin
Pierrot
Father figure
Wise old man
Elderly martial arts master
Young
Ivan the Fool
Jack
Jock
Little Johnny
Nice guy
Nice Jewish boy
Superfluous man
Himbo
Prince Charming
Bishōnen
Knight-errant
Primitive
Feral child
Noble savage
Caveman
Moleman
Mountain man
LGBT
Seme and uke
Otokonoko
Bad boy
Pachuco
Black knight
Others
Adolescent cliques
Clown
Dragonslayer
Donor
Fool
Imaginary friend
Innamorati ("The Lovers")
Little green men
Magical Negro
Pop icon
Redshirt
Straight man
Tokenism
Town drunk
Village idiot
White savior

vteCircus skillsAcrobatics, balance, andcontortion
Acrobalance
Adagio
Aerial hoop
Aerial silk
Aerial straps
Balance board
Chair acrobatics
Chinese pole
Cloud swing
Contortion
Corde lisse
Cradle
Cyr wheel
Hair hang
Hand to hand
Human pyramid
Perch
Risley
Rolling globe
Roman ladders
Russian bar
Russian swing
Slacklining
Slackwire
Spanish web
Tightrope
Trapeze
Flying
Static
Trick riding
Juggling and objectmanipulation
Bullwhip
Cigar box manipulation
Contact juggling
Diabolo
Hat manipulation
Twirling
Baton
Hoop
Plate
Fire performance
Fire breathing
Fire eating
Firewalking
Toss juggling
Vaulting
Equestrian vaulting
Human cannonball
Teeterboard
Trampoline
Other
Animal trainer
Lion taming
Clown
Circus clown
Globe of death
Human firecracker
Ringmaster
Strongman
Target girl
Wheel of Death
Related
Circus school
Roustabout
Sideshow
Flea circus

 Category
 Commons

vteComedyTopics
Comedian
Comedic device
Comedy festival
Comedy troupe
Comic timing
Farce
Humorist
Humour
Impersonator
Impressionist
Irony
Joke
Prank call
Punch line
Satire
Visual gag
Wit
Word play
FilmCountry
American
British
French
Italian
Genre
Fantasy
Horror
Parody
Remarriage
Romance
Science fiction
Screwball
Sex
Italian
Silent
Slapstick
Stoner
TheatreCountryEurope
Ancient Greek comedy
Comédie-Française
Comédie-Italienne
Corral de comedias
Theatre of ancient Rome
Asia
China
Xiangsheng
Hong Kong
Mo lei tau
Indonesia
Lenong
Ludruk
Japan
Kyōgen
Manzai
Owarai
Rakugo
Sarugaku
Genre
Boulevard theatre
Comedy-drama
Comedy of humours
Comedy of manners
Comedy of menace
Commedia dell'arte
Double act
Improvisational
Macchietta
One-person show
Pantomime
Restoration comedy
Sentimental comedy
Comédie larmoyante
Shadow play
Shakespearean comedy
Sketch comedy
Spex
Stand-up comedy
Street theatre
Theatre of the Absurd
Tragicomedy
Vaudeville
Musicand dance
Ballad opera
Cabaret
Café-chantant
Café-théâtre
Comédie-ballet
Comedy club
Light music
Music hall
Musical theatre
Opéra bouffe
Opéra bouffon
Opera buffa
Opéra comique
Operetta
Revue
Media
Music
Album
Rock
Hip hop
Parody
Musical comedians
Novel
Radio
Television
Mockumentary
Roast
Sitcom
Teen sitcom
Subgenres
Alternative
Black
Blue
Character
Christian
Clown
Cringe
Deadpan (dry humor)
Documentary
High / low
Horror
Insult
Observational
Physical
Prop
Shock
Sick
Slapstick
Topics
Surreal
Ventriloquism
Zombie

 Category
 Portal

Authority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
2
National libraries
Spain
France (data)
United States
Other
National Archives (US)






Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clown&oldid=1060930869"
		Categories: ComedyClownsEntertainment occupationsPerforming artsStock charactersHidden categories: Articles containing Italian-language textArticles containing French-language textCS1 French-language sources (fr)Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from August 2015All articles with vague or ambiguous timeVague or ambiguous time from October 2021All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2021Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018Articles needing additional references from June 2009All articles needing additional referencesVague or ambiguous geographic scope from January 2020Commons category link is on WikidataArticles containing Japanese-language textArticles with GND identifiersArticles with BNE identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NARA identifiersArticles with multiple identifiersArticles containing video clips
	