
		From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
		
		
		
		
		Jump to navigation
		Jump to search
		File
File history
File usage
Global file usage
MetadataSize of this preview: 450 × 599 pixels. Other resolutions: 180 × 240 pixels | 500 × 666 pixels.
Original file ‎(500 × 666 pixels, file size: 896 KB, MIME type: image/png)

This is a file from the Wikimedia Commons. Information from its description page there is shown below.Commons is a freely licensed media file repository. You can help.

Summary

DescriptionMuḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī.png

English:  Detail of a USSR stamp featuring Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi.
Working at The House of Wisdom in Baghdad around 825, al-Khwarizmi wrote a book entitled "The Book of Addition and Subtraction According to the Hindu Calculation." It extolled the virtues of a base ten numbering system that uses a placeholder, known as a punta, or point, which became the zero. This numbering system swept through Muslim Empire to Europe and beyond. Today the Hindu-Arabic numbering system is used worldwide. 

 Al-Kwarizmi wrote another book that changed mathematics forever: "The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing." Two of the words in the Arabic title are al-jabr, from which we derive the English word algebra. It is the symbolic language on which much of higher mathematics is based.
Date

1983
Source

http://www.storyofmathematics.com/islamic_alkhwarizmi.html
Author

ms

Licensing
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse

This work is not an object of copyright according to article 1259 of Book IV of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation No. 230-FZ of December 18, 2006.
Shall not be objects of copyright:

official documents of state government agencies and local government agencies of municipal formations, including laws, other legal texts, judicial decisions, other materials of legislative, administrative and judicial character, official documents of international organizations, as well as their official translations;
state symbols and signs (flags, emblems, orders, any forms of money, and the like), as well as symbols and signs of municipal formations;
works of folk art (folklore), which don't have specific authors;
news reports on events and facts, which have a purely informational character (daily news reports, television programs, transportation schedules, and the like).



Comment – This license tag is also applicable to official documents, state symbols and signs of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (union level[1]).
Warning – This license tag is not applicable to drafts of official documents, proposed official symbols and signs, which can be copyrighted.
Warning – This Russian official document, state symbol or sign (postage stamps, coins and banknotes mainly) may incorporate one or more works that can be copyrightable if separated from this document, symbol or sign. In such a case, this work is not an object of copyright if reused in its entirety but, at the same time, extracting specific portions from this work could constitute copyright infringement. For example, the denomination and country name must be preserved on postage stamps.


↑ Official documents, state symbols and signs of 14 other Soviet Republics are the subject of law of their legal successors. See respective license tags.


CaptionsEnglishAdd a one-line explanation of what this file representsItems portrayed in this filedepictsinception1983
File history

Click on a date/time to view the file as it appeared at that time.


Date/TimeThumbnailDimensionsUserComment
current07:30, 2 November 2014500 × 666 (896 KB)Ibrahim.IDbetter and larger
01:00, 4 December 2013127 × 170 (55 KB)Arc112User created page with UploadWizard



File usage

The following pages on the English Wikipedia use this file (pages on other projects are not listed):
Algebra


Global file usage
The following other wikis use this file:

Usage on ar.wikipedia.org
	بوابة:خوارزميات
	بوابة:جبر
	بوابة:خوارزميات/مقالات مختارة
	بوابة:هندسة رياضية/شخصية مختارة
	بوابة:هندسة رياضية/شخصية مختارة/5
	بوابة:خوارزميات/مقالات مختارة/1
	بوابة:العصور الوسطى/شخصية مختارة
	بوابة:العصور الوسطى/شخصية مختارة/13
	بوابة:جبر/شخصية مختارة
	بوابة:جبر/شخصية مختارة/1

Usage on co.wikipedia.org
	Al-Khwarizmi

Usage on cv.wikipedia.org
	Алгебра

Usage on cy.wikipedia.org
	Algebra

Usage on es.wikipedia.org
	Reino de Gao

Usage on eu.wikipedia.org
	Matematikaren historia
	Lankide:Ragnokcc/Proba orria

Usage on fr.wikipedia.org
	Gnomon

Usage on gu.wikipedia.org
	બીજગણિત

Usage on gu.wikisource.org
	પૃષ્ઠ:Muslim Vaignaniko.pdf/૧૯
	મધ્યયુગના પ્રસિધ્ધ મુસ્લિમ વૈજ્ઞાનિકો/અલ ખ્વારિઝમી

Usage on it.wikipedia.org
	Storia dell'Uzbekistan

Usage on sd.wikipedia.org
	آلجبرا

Usage on sl.wikipedia.org
	Algebra

Usage on su.wikipedia.org
	Aljabar


Metadata
This file contains additional information, probably added from the digital camera or scanner used to create or digitize it.

If the file has been modified from its original state, some details may not fully reflect the modified file.
Horizontal resolution37.8 dpcVertical resolution37.8 dpcPNG file commentCREATOR: gd-jpeg v1.0 (using IJG JPEG v62), quality = 90



Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Muḥammad_ibn_Mūsā_al-Khwārizmī.png"
		
	