
		From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
		
		
		
		
		Jump to navigation
		Jump to search
		International organisation founded in 1949
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}Not to be confused with European Council or Council of the European Union.



.mw-parser-output .infobox-subbox{padding:0;border:none;margin:-3px;width:auto;min-width:100%;font-size:100%;clear:none;float:none;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .infobox-3cols-child{margin:auto}Council of EuropeConseil de l'EuropeLogoFlagAbbreviationCoEFormationTreaty of London (1949)TypeRegional intergovernmental organisationHeadquartersPalace of Europe, Strasbourg, FranceLocationEurope, North America (Greenland, Dutch Caribbean), Asia (Siberia, Anatolia, Georgia, Cyprus, Armenia and Azerbaijan), South America (French Guiana), Oceania (French Polynesia),
Africa (Ceuta, Melilla, Réunion, Mayotte)Membership  47 member states5 Council observers3 Assembly observersOfficial languages English, FrenchOther working languages: German, Italian, Russian[1][2]Secretary GeneralMarija Pejčinović BurićDeputy Secretary GeneralGabriella Battaini-DragoniPresident of the Parliamentary AssemblyRik DaemsPresident of the Committee of MinistersLuigi Di MaioPresident of the CongressAnders KnapeWebsitewww.coe.int
The Council of Europe (CoE; French: Conseil de l'Europe, CdE) is an international organisation founded in the wake of World War II to uphold human rights, democracy and the rule of law in Europe.[3] Founded in 1949, it has 47 member states, with a population of approximately 820 million, and operates with an annual budget of approximately 500 million euros.[4]
The organisation is distinct from the 27-nation European Union (EU), although it is sometimes confused with it, partly because the EU has adopted the original European Flag which was created by the Council of Europe in 1955,[5] as well as the European Anthem.[6] No country has ever joined the EU without first belonging to the Council of Europe.[7] The Council of Europe is an official United Nations Observer.[8]
The Council of Europe cannot make binding laws, but it does have the power to enforce select international agreements reached by European states on various topics. The best known body of the Council of Europe is the European Court of Human Rights, which enforces the European Convention on Human Rights.
The council's two statutory bodies are the Committee of Ministers, comprising the foreign ministers of each member state, and the Parliamentary Assembly, composed of members of the national parliaments of each member state. The Commissioner for Human Rights is an independent institution within the Council of Europe, mandated to promote awareness of and respect for human rights in the member states. The Secretary General heads the secretariat of the organisation. Other major CoE bodies include the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and the European Audiovisual Observatory.
The headquarters of the Council of Europe are in Strasbourg, France. English and French are its two official languages. The Committee of Ministers, the Parliamentary Assembly, and the Congress of the Council of Europe also use German, Italian, and Russian for some of their work.

Contents

1 History

1.1 Founding
1.2 Early years
1.3 Historic speeches at the Council of Europe


2 Aims and achievements
3 Institutions

3.1 Headquarters and buildings


4 Member states, observers, partners
5 Co-operation

5.1 Non-member states
5.2 European Union
5.3 Schools of Political Studies
5.4 United Nations
5.5 Non-governmental organisations
5.6 Others


6 Characteristics

6.1 Privileges and immunities
6.2 Symbol and anthem


7 Criticism and controversies
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



History[edit]
  Plaque commemorating the first session of the Council of Europe Assembly at Strasbourg University
Founding[edit]
In a speech in 1929, French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand floated the idea of an organisation which would gather European nations together in a "federal union" to resolve common problems.[9] But it was Britain's wartime leader Sir Winston Churchill who first publicly suggested the creation of a "Council of Europe" in a BBC radio broadcast on 21 March 1943,[10] while the Second World War was still raging. In his own words,[11] he tried to "peer through the mists of the future to the end of the war", and think about how to re-build and maintain peace on a shattered continent. Given that Europe had been at the origin of two world wars, the creation of such a body would be, he suggested, "a stupendous business". He returned to the idea during a well-known speech at the University of Zurich on 19 September 1946,[12][13] throwing the full weight of his considerable post-war prestige behind it. But there were many other statesmen and politicians across the continent, many of them members of the European Movement, who were quietly working towards the creation of the council. Some regarded it as a guarantee that the horrors of war could never again be visited on the continent, others came to see it as a "club of democracies", built around a set of common values that could stand as a bulwark against totalitarian states belonging to the Eastern Bloc. Others again saw it as a nascent "United States of Europe", the resonant phrase that Churchill had reached for at Zurich in 1946.

  Session of the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly in the former House of Europe in Strasbourg in 1967. Willy Brandt, German Minister for Foreign Affairs, is speaking.
The future structure of the Council of Europe was discussed at the Congress of Europe which brought together several hundred leading politicians, government representatives and members of civil society in The Hague, Netherlands, in 1948. There were two competing schools of thought: some favoured a classical international organisation with representatives of governments, while others preferred a political forum with parliamentarians. Both approaches were finally combined through the creation of a Committee of Ministers (in which governments were represented) and a Consultative Assembly (in which parliaments were represented), the two main bodies mentioned in the Statute of the Council of Europe. This dual intergovernmental and inter-parliamentary structure was later copied for the European Communities, North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.
The Council of Europe was signed into existence on 5 May 1949 by the Treaty of London, the organisation's founding Statute which set out the three basic values that should guide its work: democracy, human rights and the rule of law. It was signed in London on that day by ten states: Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom, though Turkey and Greece joined three months later. On 10 August 1949, 100 members of the council's Consultative Assembly, parliamentarians drawn from the twelve member nations, met in Strasbourg for its first plenary session, held over 18 sittings and lasting nearly a month. They debated how to reconcile and reconstruct a continent still reeling from war, yet already facing a new East–West divide, launched the concept of a trans-national court to protect the basic human rights of every citizen, and took the first steps in a process that would eventually lead to the creation of the European Union.
In August 1949, Paul-Henri Spaak resigned as Belgium's Foreign Minister in order to be elected as the first President of the Assembly. Behind the scenes, he too had been quietly working towards the creation of the council, and played a key role in steering its early work. However, in December 1951, after nearly three years in the role, Spaak resigned in disappointment after the Assembly rejected proposals for a "European political authority".[14] Convinced that the Council of Europe was never going to be in a position to achieve his long-term goal of a unified Europe,[15] he soon tried again in a new and more promising format, based this time on economic integration, becoming one of the founders of the European Union.[16]

Early years[edit]
There was huge enthusiasm for the Council of Europe in its early years, as its pioneers set about drafting what was to become the European Convention on Human Rights, a charter of individual rights which - it was hoped - no member government could ever again violate. They drew, in part, on the tenets of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, signed only a few months earlier in Paris. But crucially, where the Universal Declaration was essentially aspirational, the European Convention from the beginning featured an enforcement mechanism - an international Court - which was to adjudicate on alleged violations of its articles and hold governments to account, a dramatic leap forward for international justice. Today, this is the European Court of Human Rights, whose rulings are binding on 47 European nations, the most far-reaching system of international justice anywhere in the world.
One of the council's first acts was to welcome West Germany into its fold on 2 May 1951,[17] setting a pattern of post-war reconciliation that was to become a hallmark of the council, and beginning a long process of "enlargement" which was to see the organisation grow from its original ten founding member states to the 47 nations that make up the Council of Europe today.[18] Iceland had already joined in 1950, followed in 1956 by Austria, Cyprus in 1961, Switzerland in 1963 and Malta in 1965.

Historic speeches at the Council of Europe[edit]
  Winston Churchill's inaugural speech of the Council of Europe in The Hague
In 2018 an archive of all speeches made to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe by heads of state or government since the Council of Europe's creation in 1949 appeared online, the fruit of a two-year project entitled "Voices of Europe".[19] At the time of its launch,[20] the archive comprised 263 speeches delivered over a 70-year period by some 216 Presidents, Prime Ministers, monarchs and religious leaders from 45 countries - though it continues to expand, as new speeches are added every few months.
Some very early speeches by individuals considered to be "founding figures" of the European institutions, even if they were not heads of state or government at the time, are also included (such as Sir Winston Churchill or Robert Schuman). Addresses by eight monarchs appear in the list (such as King Juan Carlos I of Spain, King Albert II of Belgium and Grand Duke Henri of Luxembourg) as well as the speeches given by religious figures (such as Pope John Paul II, and Pope Francis) and several leaders from countries in the Middle East and North Africa (such as Shimon Peres, Yasser Arafat, Hosni Mubarak, Léopold Sédar Senghor or King Hussein of Jordan).
The full text of the speeches is given in both English and French, regardless of the original language used. The archive is searchable by country, by name, and chronologically.[21]

Aims and achievements[edit]
Article 1(a) of the Statute states that "The aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity between its members for the purpose of safeguarding and realising the ideals and principles which are their common heritage and facilitating their economic and social progress."[22] Membership is open to all European states who seek harmony, cooperation, good governance and human rights, accepting the principle of the rule of law and are able and willing to guarantee democracy, fundamental human rights and freedoms.
Whereas the member states of the European Union transfer part of their national legislative and executive powers to the European Commission and the European Parliament, Council of Europe member states maintain their sovereignty but commit themselves through conventions/treaties (international law) and co-operate on the basis of common values and common political decisions. Those conventions and decisions are developed by the member states working together at the Council of Europe. Both organisations function as concentric circles around the common foundations for European co-operation and harmony, with the Council of Europe being the geographically wider circle. The European Union could be seen as the smaller circle with a much higher level of integration through the transfer of powers from the national to the EU level. "The Council of Europe and the European Union: different roles, shared values."[23] Council of Europe conventions/treaties are also open for signature to non-member states, thus facilitating equal co-operation with countries outside Europe.
The Council of Europe's most famous achievement is the European Convention on Human Rights, which was adopted in 1950 following a report by the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly, and followed on from the United Nations 'Universal Declaration of Human Rights' (UDHR).[24] The Convention created the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. The Court supervises compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights and thus functions as the highest European court. It is to this court that Europeans can bring cases if they believe that a member country has violated their fundamental rights and freedoms.
The various activities and achievements of the Council of Europe can be found in detail on its official website. The Council of Europe works in the following areas:

Protection of the rule of law and fostering legal co-operation through some 200 conventions and other treaties,[25] including such leading instruments as the Convention on Cybercrime, the Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism, Conventions against Corruption and Organised Crime,[26][27][28] the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, and the Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine.[29]
CODEXTER, designed to co-ordinate counter-terrorism measures
The European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice (CEPEJ)
Protection of human rights, notably through:
the European Convention on Human Rights
the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture
the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance
the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings[30]
the Convention for the protection of individuals with regard to automatic processing of personal data
the Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse[29]
The Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence.[31]
social rights under the European Social Charter
linguistic rights under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
minority rights under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
Media freedom under Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Convention on Transfrontier Television
Protection of democracy through parliamentary scrutiny and election monitoring by its Parliamentary Assembly as well as assistance in democratic reforms, in particular by the Venice Commission.
Promotion of cultural co-operation and diversity under the Council of Europe's Cultural Convention of 1954 and several conventions on the protection of cultural heritage as well as through its Centre for Modern Languages in Graz, Austria, and its North-South Centre in Lisbon, Portugal.
Promotion of the right to education under Article 2 of the first Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights and several conventions on the recognition of university studies and diplomas (see also Bologna Process and Lisbon Recognition Convention).
Promotion of fair sport through the Anti-Doping Convention[32]
Promotion of European youth exchanges and co-operation through European Youth Centres in Strasbourg and Budapest, Hungary.
Promotion of the quality of medicines throughout Europe by the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and its European Pharmacopoeia.


Support for intercultural integration through the Intercultural Cities (ICC) program. This program offers information and advice for local authorities on the integration of minorities and the prevention of discrimination.[33]
Institutions[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The institutions of the Council of Europe are:

The Secretary General, who is elected for a term of five years by the Parliamentary Assembly and heads the Secretariat of the Council of Europe. Thorbjørn Jagland, the former Prime Minister of Norway, was elected Secretary General of the Council of Europe on 29 September 2009.[34] In June 2014, he became the first Secretary General to be re-elected, commencing his second term in office on 1 October 2014.[35]
The Committee of Ministers, comprising the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of all 47 member states who are represented by their Permanent Representatives and Ambassadors accredited to the Council of Europe. Committee of Ministers' presidencies are held in alphabetical order for six months following the English alphabet: Turkey 11/2010-05/2011, Ukraine 05/2011-11/2011, the United Kingdom 11/2011-05/2012, Albania 05/2012-11/2012, Andorra 11/2012-05/2013, Armenia 05/2013-11/2013, Austria 11/2013-05/2014, and so on.[36]
  Council's Parliamentary Assembly hemicycle
The Parliamentary Assembly (PACE), which comprises national parliamentarians from all member states.[37] Adopting resolutions and recommendations to governments, the Assembly holds a dialogue with its governmental counterpart, the Committee of Ministers, and is often regarded as the "motor" of the organisation. The national parliamentary delegations to the Assembly must reflect the political spectrum of their national parliament, i.e. comprise government and opposition parties. The Assembly appoints members as rapporteurs with the mandate to prepare parliamentary reports on specific subjects. The British MP Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe was rapporteur for the drafting of the European Convention on Human Rights. Dick Marty's reports on secret CIA detentions and rendition flights in Europe became quite famous in 2006 and 2007. Other Assembly reports were instrumental in, for example, the abolition of the death penalty in Europe, highlighting the political and human rights situation in Chechnya, identifying who was responsible for disappeared persons in Belarus, chronicling threats to freedom of expression in the media and many other subjects.
The Congress of the Council of Europe (Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe), which was created in 1994 and comprises political representatives from local and regional authorities in all member states. The most influential instruments of the Council of Europe in this field are the European Charter of Local Self-Government of 1985 and the European Outline Convention on Transfrontier Co-operation between Territorial Communities or Authorities of 1980.[38][39]
The European Court of Human Rights, created under the European Convention on Human Rights of 1950, is composed of a judge from each member state elected for a single, non-renewable term of nine years by the Parliamentary Assembly and is headed by the elected President of the Court. The current President of the Court is Guido Raimondi from Italy. Under the recent Protocol No. 14 to the European Convention on Human Rights, the Court's case-processing was reformed and streamlined. Ratification of Protocol No. 14 was delayed by Russia for a number of years, but won support to be passed in January 2010.[40]
The Commissioner for Human Rights is elected by the Parliamentary Assembly for a non-renewable term of six years since the creation of this position in 1999. Since April 2018, this position has been held by Dunja Mijatović from Bosnia and Herzegovina.[41]
The Conference of INGOs.[42] NGOs can participate in the INGOs Conference of the Council of Europe. Since the [Resolution (2003)8] adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 19 November 2003, they are given a "participatory status".[43]
The Joint Council on Youth of the Council of Europe.[44] The European Steering Committee (CDEJ) on Youth and the Advisory Council on Youth (CCJ) of the Council of Europe form together the Joint Council on Youth (CMJ). The CDEJ brings together representatives of ministries or bodies responsible for youth matters from the 50 States Parties to the European Cultural Convention. The CDEJ fosters co-operation between governments in the youth sector and provides a framework for comparing national youth policies, exchanging best practices and drafting standard-setting texts. The Advisory Council on Youth comprises 30 representatives of non-governmental youth organisations and networks. It provides opinions and input from youth NGOs on all youth sector activities and ensures that young people are involved in the council's other activities.
Information Offices of the Council of Europe in many member states.
  European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines.
The CoE system also includes a number of semi-autonomous structures known as "Partial Agreements", some of which are also open to non-member states:

The Council of Europe Development Bank in Paris
The European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines with its European Pharmacopoeia
The European Audiovisual Observatory
The European Support Fund Eurimages for the co-production and distribution of films
The Enlarged Partial Agreement on Cultural Routes, which awards the certification "Cultural Route of the Council of Europe" to transnational networks promoting European heritage and intercultural dialogue (Luxembourg)
The Pompidou Group – Cooperation Group to Combat Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking in Drugs
The European Commission for Democracy through Law, better known as the Venice Commission
The Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO)
The European and Mediterranean Major Hazards Agreement (EUR-OPA) which is a platform for co-operation between European and Southern Mediterranean countries in the field of major natural and technological disasters.
The Enlarged Partial Agreement on Sport, which is open to accession by states and sport associations.[45]
The North-South Centre of the Council of Europe in Lisbon (Portugal)
The Centre for Modern Languages is in Graz (Austria)
Headquarters and buildings[edit]
See also: European Institutions in Strasbourg
  Aerial shot of the Palais de l'Europe in Strasbourg
  Council of Europe's Agora building
The seat of the Council of Europe is in Strasbourg, France. First meetings were held in Strasbourg's University Palace in 1949, but the Council of Europe soon moved into its own buildings. The Council of Europe's eight main buildings are situated in the Quartier européen, an area in the northeast of Strasbourg spread over the three districts of Le Wacken, La Robertsau and Quartier de l'Orangerie, where are also located the four buildings of the seat of the European Parliament in Strasbourg, the Arte headquarters and the seat of the International Institute of Human Rights.
Building in the area started in 1949 with the predecessor of the Palais de l'Europe, the House of Europe (demolished in 1977), and came to a provisional end in 2007 with the opening of the New General Office Building, later named "Agora", in 2008.[46] The Palais de l'Europe (Palace of Europe) and the Art Nouveau Villa Schutzenberger (seat of the European Audiovisual Observatory) are in the Orangerie district, and the European Court of Human Rights, the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and the Agora Building are in the Robertsau district. The Agora building has been voted "best international business center real estate project of 2007" on 13 March 2008, at the MIPIM 2008.[47] The European Youth Centre is located in the Wacken district.
Besides its headquarters in Strasbourg, the Council of Europe is also present in other cities and countries. The Council of Europe Development Bank has its seat in Paris, the North-South Centre of the Council of Europe is established in Lisbon, Portugal, and the Centre for Modern Languages is in Graz, Austria. There are European Youth Centres in Budapest, Hungary, and in Strasbourg. The European Wergeland Centre, a new Resource Centre on education for intercultural dialogue, human rights and democratic citizenship, operated in cooperation with the Norwegian Government, opened in Oslo, Norway, in February 2009.[48]
The Council of Europe has offices in Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia, and Ukraine; information offices in Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Ukraine; and a projects office in Turkey. All these offices are establishments of the Council of Europe and they share its juridical personality with privileges and immunities.

Member states, observers, partners[edit]
Main article: Member states of the Council of Europe
The Council of Europe was founded on 5 May 1949 by Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom.[49] Greece[50][51] joined three months later, and Iceland,[52][53] Turkey[54][55] and West Germany[56][57] the next year. It now has 47 member states, with Montenegro being the latest to join.
Article 4 of the Council of Europe Statute specifies that membership is open to any "European" State.[58] This has been interpreted liberally from the beginning, when Turkey was admitted, to include transcontinental states (such as Georgia and Azerbaijan) and states that are geographically Asian but socio-politically European (such as Armenia and Cyprus).
Nearly all European states have acceded to the Council of Europe, with the exceptions of Belarus (human rights concerns including active use of the death penalty), Kazakhstan (human rights concerns), and the Vatican City (the independent state ruled by the Holy See), as well as some of the territories with limited recognition.
Besides the status as a full member, the Council of Europe has established other instruments for cooperation and participation of non-member states: observer, applicant, special guest, and partner for democracy.

Co-operation[edit]
Non-member states[edit]
The Council of Europe works mainly through conventions. By drafting conventions or international treaties, common legal standards are set for its member states. However, several conventions have also been opened for signature to non-member states. Important examples are the Convention on Cybercrime (signed for example, by Canada, Japan, South Africa and the United States), the Lisbon Recognition Convention on the recognition of study periods and degrees (signed for example, by Australia, Belarus, Canada, the Holy See, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, New Zealand and the United States), the Anti-doping Convention (signed, for example, by Australia, Belarus, Canada and Tunisia) and the Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats (signed for example, by Burkina Faso, Morocco, Tunisia and Senegal as well as the European Community). Non-member states also participate in several partial agreements, such as the Venice Commission, the Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO), the European Pharmacopoeia Commission and the North-South Centre.
Invitations to sign and ratify relevant conventions of the Council of Europe on a case-by-case basis are sent to three groups of non-member entities:[59]

Non-European states: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Bahamas, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, South Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mauritius, Morocco, New Zealand, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Senegal, South Africa, Syria, Tajikistan, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uruguay, Venezuela and the observers Canada, Israel, Japan, Mexico, United States.
European states: Kosovo, Kazakhstan, Belarus and the observer Vatican City.
the European Community and later the European Union after its legal personality was established by the ratification of the EU's Lisbon Treaty.
European Union[edit]
Main article: Council of Europe–European Union relations
  A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational European organisations and agreements..mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a&gt;span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a&gt;abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vte
The Council of Europe is not to be confused with the Council of the European Union (the "Council of Ministers") or the European Council. These belong to the European Union, which is separate from the Council of Europe, although they have shared the same European flag and anthem since the 1980s since they both work for European integration. Nor is the Council of Europe to be confused with the European Union itself.
The Council of Europe is an entirely separate body[60] from the European Union. It is not controlled by it.
Cooperation between the European Union and the Council of Europe has recently been reinforced, notably on culture and education as well as on the international enforcement of justice and Human Rights.[61]
The European Union is expected to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights (the convention). There are also concerns about consistency in case law – the European Court of Justice (the EU's court in Luxembourg) is treating the convention as part of the legal system of all EU member states in order to prevent conflict between its judgements and those of the European Court of Human Rights (the court in Strasbourg interpreting the convention). Protocol No. 14 of the convention is designed to allow the EU to accede to it and the EU Treaty of Lisbon contains a protocol binding the EU to join. The EU would thus be subject to its human rights law and external monitoring as its member states currently are.[62][63]

Schools of Political Studies[edit]
The Council of Europe Schools of political studies were established to train future generations of political, economic, social and cultural leaders in countries in transition. With the participation of national and international experts, they run annual series of seminars and conferences on topics such as European integration, democracy, human rights, the rule of law and globalisation.  The first School of Political Studies was created in Moscow in 1992. Since then, 20 other schools have been set up along the same lines and now form an Association;[64] a genuine network now covering the whole of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe and the Caucasus, as well as some countries in the Southern Mediterranean region.  The Council of Europe Schools of political studies is part of the Education Department which is part of the Directorate of Democratic Participation within the Directorate General of Democracy ("DGII") of the Council of Europe.[65]

United Nations[edit]
The beginning of co-operation between the CoE and the UN started with the agreement signed by the Secretariats of these institutions on 15 December 1951. On 17 October 1989, the General Assembly of the United Nations approved a resolution on granting observer status to the Council of Europe which was proposed by several member states of the CoE.[66] Currently, the Council of Europe holds observer status with the United Nations and is regularly represented in the UN General Assembly. It has organised the regional UN conferences against racism and on women and co-operates with the United Nations at many levels, in particular in the areas of human rights, minorities, migration and counter-terrorism. In November 2016, the UN General Assembly adopted by consensus Resolution (A/Res/71/17) on Cooperation between the United Nations and the Council of Europe whereby it acknowledged the contribution of Council of Europe to the protection and strengthening of human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law, welcomed the ongoing co-operation in a variety of fields.

Non-governmental organisations[edit]
Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) can participate in the INGOs Conference of the Council of Europe and become observers to inter-governmental committees of experts. The Council of Europe drafted the European Convention on the Recognition of the Legal Personality of International Non-Governmental Organisations in 1986, which sets the legal basis for the existence and work of NGOs in Europe. Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights protects the right to freedom of association, which is also a fundamental norm for NGOs. The rules for Consultative Status for INGOs appended to the resolution (93)38 "On relation between the Council of Europe and non-governmental organisations", adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 18 October 1993 at the 500th meeting of the Ministers' Deputies.
On 19 November 2003, the Committee of Ministers changed the consultative status into a participatory status, "considering that it is indispensable that the rules governing the relations between the Council of Europe and NGOs evolve to reflect the active participation of international non-governmental organisations (INGOs) in the Organisation's policy and work programme".[67]

Others[edit]
On 30 May 2018, the Council of Europe signed a memorandum of understanding with the European football confederation UEFA.[68]
The Council of Europe also signed an agreement with FIFA in which the two agreed to strengthen future cooperation in areas of common interests. The deal which included cooperation between member states in the sport of football and safety and security at football matches was finalized in October 2018.[69]

Characteristics[edit]
Privileges and immunities[edit]
The General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe grants the organisation certain privileges and immunities.[70]
The working conditions of staff are governed by the council's staff regulations, which are public.[71] Salaries and emoluments paid by the Council of Europe to its officials are tax-exempt on the basis of Article 18 of the General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe.[70]

Symbol and anthem[edit]
Main articles: Symbols of Europe and Flag of Europe
The Council of Europe created, and has since 1955 used as its official symbol, the European Flag with 12 golden stars arranged in a circle on a blue background.
Its musical anthem since 1972, the "European Anthem", is based on the "Ode to Joy" theme from Ludwig van Beethoven's ninth symphony.
On 5 May 1964, the 15th anniversary of its founding, the Council of Europe established 5 May as Europe Day.[72]
The wide private and public use of the European Flag is encouraged to symbolise a European dimension. To avoid confusion with the European Union which subsequently adopted the same flag in the 1980s, as well as other European institutions, the Council of Europe often uses a modified version with a lower-case "e" surrounding the stars which are referred to as the "Council of Europe Logo".[72][73]

Criticism and controversies[edit]
The Council of Europe has been accused of institutional corruption[74][75] and of not having any meaningful purpose, being superfluous in its aims to other pan-European bodies, including the European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).[76][75] In 2013 The Economist agreed, saying that the "Council of Europe's credibility is on the line".[77] Both Human Rights Watch and the European Stability Initiative have called on the Council of Europe to undertake concrete actions to show that it is willing and able to return to its "original mission to protect and ensure human rights".[78]
Issues have been raised regarding Azerbaijan's relationship to the Council of Europe, including allegations that Azerbaijan has, over a sustained period, provided bribes to Council members to vote down criticism of the authoritarian rule of the Aliyev regime and support motions advantageous to Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan joined the Council of Europe in 2001. Since September 2014 Human Rights Watch said that "Azerbaijan's systematic crackdown on human rights defenders and other perceived government critics shows sheer contempt for its commitments to the Council of Europe".[79]
In 2017 Council member and Italian politician Luca Volontè was accused by Italian prosecutors of receiving over 2.3 million euros in bribes in exchange for working for Azerbaijan in the parliamentary assembly, and that in 2013 he played a key role in orchestrating the defeat of a highly critical report on the abuse of political prisoners in Azerbaijan.[80][81] The money was paid to Volontè in monthly instalments of 100,000 euros, starting in 2013, via four anonymous offshore companies. The payments stopped in 2014 when Volontè's bank reported them as suspicious transactions to the Milan prosecutor's office.[82] Arif Mammadov, former head of the Azerbaijan representation at the Council of Europe, has stated that Azerbaijan's delegation at the council had 25 million dollars available to "bribe members of the delegations and PACE generally".[citation needed]
From 2014, Russia's voting rights were temporarily suspended by the Council due to the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation from Ukraine. In response, Russia withheld its annual membership dues in the amount of 33 million euros,[83] placing the institution under financial strain.[84] Russia claimed that its suspension by the council was unfair, and demanded the restoration of voting rights.[85] European Council secretary-general Thorbjørn Jagland organized a special committee to find a compromise with Russia in early 2018, a move that was criticized as giving in to alleged Russian pressure by Council members and academic observers, especially if voting sanctions were lifted.[84][85][86] In May 2019, Russia's voting rights were restored after members of the human rights watchdog reached agreement to resolve dispute and the overwhelming majority of the Council voted in favour of the restoration.[87]

See also[edit]
.mw-parser-output .portalbox{float:right;border:solid #aaa 1px;padding:0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tleft{margin:0.5em 1em 0.5em 0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tright{margin:0.5em 0 0.5em 1em}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul{display:table;box-sizing:border-box;padding:0.1em;max-width:175px;background:#f9f9f9;font-size:85%;line-height:110%;font-style:italic;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li{display:table-row}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:first-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em;vertical-align:middle;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:last-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em 0.2em 0.2em 0.3em;vertical-align:middle}

Europe portal
Politics portal
CAHDI
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages
Conference of Specialised Ministers
Council of Europe Archives
The Europe Prize
European Anti-fraud Office
Film Award of the Council of Europe
Moneyval
International organisations in Europe, and co-ordinated organisations
List of Council of Europe treaties
List of linguistic rights in European constitutions
North–South Centre of the Council of Europe
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"Did you know?". Retrieved 10 August 2018. English and French are the official languages of the Council of Europe. German, Italian and Russian are used as working languages.

^ "Resolution 2208 (2018): Modification of the Assembly's Rules of Procedure: the impact of the budgetary crisis on the list of working languages of the Assembly". Retrieved 10 August 2018. The draconian reduction in the Assembly’s budget for 2018 and 2019, a consequence of Turkey’s decision to revert to its initial status of ordinary contributor to the Council of Europe budget, calls for drastic measures. ... In this context, the Assembly refers to the clear position it adopted, notably in Resolution 2058 (2015) on the allocation of seats in the Parliamentary Assembly with respect to Turkey, making the introduction of Turkish as a working language of the Assembly strictly conditional upon the Committee of Ministers' decision to approve Turkey’s request to become a major contributor to the Council of Europe’s budget and to allocate the corresponding funds to the Assembly.

^ "BBC News - Profile: The Council of Europe". news.bbc.co.uk.

^ Council of Europe, Budget, Retrieved: 21 April 2016

^ Council of Europe. "The European flag". Retrieved 18 April 2016

^ Council of Europe. "The European anthem". Retrieved 18 April 2016

^ Council of Europe. "How to Distinguish Us". Retrieved: 18 April 2016

^ "Intergovernmental Organizations". www.un.org.

^ "Lumni | Enseignement - Discours d'Aristide Briand devant la SDN du 7 septembre 1929". Fresques.ina.fr. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "National Address". International Churchill Society. 21 March 1943.

^ Post-War Councils on World Problems: A FOUR YEAR PLAN FOR ENGLAND by WINSTON CHURCHILL, Prime Minister of Great Britain, broadcast from London over BBC, March 21, 1943

^ "Winston Churchill and the Council of Europe". Council of Europe: Archiving and Documentary Resources. Council of Europe. 6 April 2009. Retrieved 18 November 2013., including audio extracts

^ "European Navigator (ENA)". Retrieved 4 April 2011. Including full transcript

^ Spaak (11 December 1951). "Speeches made to the Parliamentary Assembly (1949–2018)". Assembly.coe.int. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ Sandro Guerrieri, "From the Hague Congress to the Council of Europe: hopes, achievements and disappointments in the parliamentary way to European integration (1948–51)." Parliaments, Estates and Representation 34#2 (2014): 216-227.

^ "European Commission: Paul–Henri Spaak: a European visionary and talented persuader" (PDF).

^ "Accession of Germany to the Council of Europe (Strasbourg, 2 May 1951) - CVCE Website". Cvce.eu. 2 May 1951. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ The Council of Europe in brief (5 May 1949). "Our member States". Coe.int. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "Speeches made to the Parliamentary Assembly (by Country)". Assembly.coe.int. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "All speeches by heads of state and government to PACE since 1949 online". Assembly.coe.int. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "Discours prononcés devant l'Assemblée parlementaire (1949–2018) - par pays". Assembly.coe.int. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "Statute of the Council of Europe". conventions.coe.int. Retrieved 19 December 2014.

^ "The Council of Europe and the European Union". www.coe.int.

^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". www.un.org.

^ "Full list". Treaty Office.

^ "Full list". Treaty Office.

^ "Details of Treaty No.198: Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism". Treaty Office. Council of Europe.

^ "Details of Treaty No.174: Civil Law Convention on Corruption". Treaty Office. Council of Europe.

^ a b "Full list". Treaty Office.

^ "Microsoft Word - Convention 197 Trafficking E.doc" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008.

^ "Details of Treaty No.210: Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence". Treaty Office. Council of Europe.

^ "Details of Treaty No.135: Anti-Doping Convention". Treaty Office. Council of Europe.

^ "2019 ICC Brochure". Council of Europe. 2019. Retrieved 25 March 2021.

^ regjeringen.no (25 June 2014). "Thorbjørn Jagland". Government.no. Retrieved 19 September 2018.

^ "Jagland re-elected head of Council of Europe". POLITICO. 25 June 2014. Retrieved 19 September 2018.

^ "Chairmanship". Committee of Ministers. Retrieved 13 December 2017.

^ "How it works". website-pace.net. Archived from the original on 19 September 2018. Retrieved 19 September 2018.

^ "In brief". Congressof Local and Regional Authorities. Retrieved 13 December 2017.

^ "History". Congressof Local and Regional Authorities. Retrieved 13 December 2017.

^ "Full list". Treaty Office. Retrieved 19 September 2018.

^ "Biography - Commissioner for Human Rights". Commissioner for Human Rights. Retrieved 6 April 2019.

^ "Home". Coe.int. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "A word from the President on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the Conference of INGOs of the Council of Europe".

^ "About us". Coe.int. 14 February 2011. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "Enlarged Partial Agreement on Sport". Council of Europe.

^ "Inauguration of the Agora Building" (PDF) (Press release) (in French). Council of Europe. 30 January 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008.

^ "2008 List of MIPIM winners".

^ "European Wergeland Centre". Archived from the original on 18 April 2009.

^ "Statute of the Council of Europe is signed in London". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019. On 5 May 1949, at St James’s Palace, London, the Foreign Ministers of Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom signed the Treaty establishing the Council of Europe.

^ "Greece joins". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019.

^ "Greece - Member state". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019. Greece became the 11th member State of the Council of Europe on 9 August 1949.

^ "Iceland joins". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019.

^ "Iceland - Member state". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019. Iceland became the 12th member State of the Council of Europe on 7 March 1950.

^ "Turkey joins". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019.

^ "Turkey - Member state". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019. Turkey became the 13th member State of the Council of Europe on 13 April 1950.

^ "Federal Republic of Germany joins the Council of Europe". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019.

^ "Germany - Member state". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019. Germany became the 14th member State of the Council of Europe on 13 July 1950.

^ "Full list". Council of Europe. Retrieved 23 June 2019.

^ "CoE Conventions". Conventions.coe.int. 31 December 1998. Retrieved 11 February 2012.

^ "Council of the European Union". European Union. Retrieved 19 May 2012.

^ "The Council of Europe and the European Union sign an agreement to foster mutual cooperation". Council of Europe. 23 May 2007. Retrieved 5 August 2008.

^ Juncker, Jean-Claude (2006). "Council of Europe – European Union: "A sole ambition for the European continent"" (PDF). Council of Europe. Retrieved 5 August 2008.

^ "Draft treaty modifying the treaty on the European Union and the treaty establishing the European community" (PDF). Open Europe. 24 July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2007. Retrieved 5 August 2008.

^ "Home". Schoolsofpoliticalstudies.eu. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "Schools of Political Studies". Coe.int. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "The Council of Europe's Relations with the United Nations". www.coe.int. Retrieved 25 August 2017.

^ COUNCIL OF EUROPE COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS  Resolution Res(2003)8  Participatory status for international non-governmental organisations with the Council of Europe  (Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 19 November 2003 at the 861st meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies)

^ "UEFA and the Council of Europe sign Memorandum of Understanding". UEFA. 30 May 2018. Retrieved 2 June 2018.

^ "Council of Europe and FIFA ink landmark deal on cooperation in shared areas". TASS (in Russian). Retrieved 3 December 2018.

^ a b General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe, Council of Europe

^ Resolutions on the Council of Europe Staff Regulations, Council of Europe

^ a b "Flag, anthem and logo: the Council of Europe's symbols". Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 31 July 2008. Retrieved 5 August 2008.

^ "Logo of the Council of Europe". Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 2 January 2011. Retrieved 5 August 2008.

^ "Council of Europe members suspected of corruption, inquiry reveals". The Guardian. 22 April 2018. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ a b Morgan, Sam (26 April 2017). "The Brief: Council of Europe in hunt for relevance". Euractiv.com. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ "What is the Council of Europe?". BBC News. 5 February 2015. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ The Economist (23 March 2013). "Azerbaijan and the Council of Europe". Retrieved 29 September 2014.

^ European Stability Initiative. "What the 2014 Havel Prize says about the Council of Europe – and what should happen now" (29 September 2014). ESI web. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2014.

^ Human Rights Watch (29 September 2014). "Azerbaijan: Government Repression Tarnishes Chairmanship Council of Europe's Leadership Should Take Action". Retrieved 29 September 2014.

^ Jennifer Rankin, Council of Europe urged to investigate Azerbaijan bribery allegations, The Guardian, 1 February 2017 [1].

^ Matthew Valencia (19 June 2020). "Heaping on the Caviar Diplomacy". The Economist. 1843magazine.com. Retrieved 24 September 2020.

^ Gabanelli, Milena. "Il Consiglio d'Europa e il caso Azerbaijan tra regali e milioni". Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Retrieved 30 January 2017.

^ Russia cancels payment to Council of Europe after claiming its delegates are being persecuted over Crimea, The Independent. 30 June 2017

^ a b (www.dw.com), Deutsche Welle. "Russia withholds payments to the Council of Europe | DW | 01.03.2018". DW.COM. Retrieved 19 September 2018.

^ a b Buckley, Neil (26 November 2017). "Russia tests Council of Europe in push to regain vote". Financial Times.

^ "A Classic Dilemma: Russia's Threat to Withdraw from the Council of Europe". Heinrich Böll Stiftung European Union. Retrieved 19 September 2018.

^ Weise, Zia (17 May 2019). "Council of Europe restores Russia's voting rights". POLITICO. Retrieved 18 May 2019.


Further reading[edit]
Dedman, Martin (2006). The Origins and Development of the European Union 1945–1995. doi:10.4324/9780203131817. ISBN 9780203131817.
Dinan, Desmond. Europe Recast: A History of European Union (2nd ed. 2004). excerpt; the excerpt covers the historiography
Gillingham, John. Coal, Steel, and the Rebirth of Europe, 1945–1955: The Germans and French from Ruhr Conflict to Economic Community (Cambridge UP, 2004).
Guerrieri, Sandro (2014). "From the Hague Congress to the Council of Europe: Hopes, achievements and disappointments in the parliamentary way to European integration (1948–51)". Parliaments, Estates and Representation. 34 (2): 216–227. doi:10.1080/02606755.2014.952133. S2CID 142610321.
Kopf, Susanne. Debating the European Union Transnationally: Wikipedians' Construction of the EU on a Wikipedia Talk Page (2001–2015). (PhD dissertation Lancaster University, 2018)  online.
Moravcsik, Andrew. The Choice for Europe: Social Purpose and State Power from Messina to Maastricht (Cornell UP, 1998). ISBN 9780801435096. OCLC 925023272.
Stone, Dan. Goodbye to All That?: The Story of Europe Since 1945 (Oxford UP, 2014).
Urwin, Derek W. (2014). The Community of Europe. doi:10.4324/9781315843650. ISBN 9781315843650.
External links[edit]
Official website
General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe, Paris, 2 September 1949
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox th,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output th.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vte Council of EuropeInstitutions
Secretary General
Committee of  Ministers
Parliamentary  Assembly
Congress
Court of Human Rights
Commissioner for Human Rights
Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
Commission against Racism and Intolerance
Venice Commission
Members
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Observers
Canada
Holy See
Israel
Japan
Mexico
United States
EU relations
Former members
Czechoslovakia (1991–1992)
Saar (assoc. 1950–1956)
Serbia and Montenegro (2003–2006)

Links to related articles
vteEurope articlesHistoryChronology
Prehistory
Classical antiquity
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
Early modernity
World War I
World War II
Pax Europaea
Crisis situations and unrest since 2000
By topic
Military
Sovereignty
predecessor states
Geography
Areas and populations
Countries by area
European microstates
Largest metropolitan areas
Cities
Extreme points
Geology
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Rivers
Sovereign states and dependent territories
by population
Villages
Politics
Eurosphere
International organisations
Integration
Law
Politics
Post-Soviet Europe
Transatlantic relations
Intergovernmental
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Council of Europe (CoE)
Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO)
GUAM Organization
Open Balkan
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO)
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)
statistics
European Union
Economy
relations
free trade agreements
Education
European Economic Area (EEA)
European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP)
European Union Customs Union (EUCU)
Eurozone
Foreign relations
Members
enlargement
Politics
Schengen Area
Statistics
Visa policy
Economy
History
Financial (and social) rankings
Free trade areas
Energy
Telecommunications
Transport
Intergovernmental
Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA)
Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia (CUBKR)
Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC)
European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
Sovereign states by
Average wage
Budget revenues
per capita
GDP (nominal)
per capita
GDP (PPP)
per capita
GNI (nominal) per capita
GNI (PPP) per capita
HDI
Internet users (%)
Minimum wage
Press Freedom Index
Unemployment rate (%)
Health expense per capita
Military spending (%)
Childhood population (%)
Urban population (%)
Life expectancy
Electricity use per capita
Society
Etiquette
Social (and financial) rankings
Languages
endangered
Universities
Bologna Process
Erasmus
Culture
Art
painting
sculpture
Architecture
Capital of Culture
Cinema
film festivals
Classical music
Cuisine
Dance
Literature
Philosophy
Religion
Christianity
Islam
Judaism
Sport
Symbols (Armorial, Flags)
Demographics
Ageing
Ethnic groups
genetic history
Immigration
Life expectancy
Retirement
.mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
Maps
vteRegional organizationsBodies
African Union
Arab League
ASEAN
Asia Cooperation Dialogue
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Association of Caribbean States
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation
British–Irish Council
Bucharest Nine
Caribbean Community
Central American Integration System
Commonwealth of Independent States
Commonwealth of Nations
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Council of Europe
Craiova Group
East African Community
Economic Community of West African States
Economic Cooperation Organization
Eurasian Economic Union
European Union
Forum for the Progress and Development of South America
GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development
Gulf Cooperation Council
Indian Ocean Rim Association
Latin American Parliament
Lublin Triangle
Melanesian Spearhead Group
Mercosur
NATO
Nordic Council
Organization of American States
Pacific Islands Forum
Polynesian Leaders Group
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
TAKM
Three Seas Initiative
Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat
Organization of Turkic States
Union of South American Nations
Visegrád Group
West Nordic Council
Topics
Regional integration
Regional organizations by population
Regionalism (international relations)

vtePower in international relationsTypes
Economic
Energy
Food
Hard
National
Politics
Realpolitik
Sharp
Smart
Soft
Status
Small
Middle
Regional
Emerging
Least Great
Great
Potential
Super
Hyper
Geopolitics
American (Pax)
Asian
British
Soviets
Chinese
Indian
Pacific
History
List of ancient great powers
List of medieval great powers
List of modern great powers
International relations of the Great Powers (1814–1919)
Theory
Balance of power
European
Hegemonic stability theory
Philosophy of power
Polarity
Power projection
Power transition theory
Second Superpower
Sphere of influence
Superpower collapse
Superpower disengagement
Studies
Composite Index of National Capability
Comprehensive National Power
Organizations and groups by regionAfrica
African Union
Union for the Mediterranean
Africa–Asia
Arab League
Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC)
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
Americas
Association of Caribbean States (ACS)
Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Mercosur
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Organization of American States (OAS)
Union of South American Nations (UNASUR)
Asia
Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summits
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)
Europe
Council of Europe (CoE)
European Union (EU)
Nordic Council
Visegrád Group (V4)
Eurasia
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU)
Organization of Turkic States
North America–Europe
Arctic Council
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Africa–Asia–Europe
Union for the Mediterranean
Africa–South America
South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
Oceania–Pacific
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Australia–New Zealand–United States Security Treaty (ANZUS)
Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG)
Pacific Islands Forum (PIF)
Polynesian Leaders Group (PLG)
Non–regional
Brazil–Russia–India–China–South Africa (BRICS)
Colombia–Indonesia–Vietnam–Egypt–Turkey–South Africa (CIVETS)
Commonwealth of Nations
E7
E9
G4
G7
G8
G8+5
G20
G24
G77
India–Brazil–South Africa Dialogue Forum (IBSA)
Mexico–Indonesia–Nigeria–Turkey (MINT)
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF)
Uniting for Consensus
Global
United Nations (UN)

.mw-parser-output .sister-box{border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0;background:#f9f9f9}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>div{padding:0.75em 0;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>div>b{display:block}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>ul{border-top:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.75em 0;width:217px;margin:0 auto}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>ul>li{min-height:31px}.mw-parser-output .sister-logo{display:inline-block;width:31px;line-height:31px;vertical-align:middle;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .sister-link{display:inline-block;margin-left:4px;width:182px;vertical-align:middle}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:flex;justify-content:center;align-items:baseline;font-size:88%;background-color:#fdfdfd;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;clear:both;margin:1em 0 0;padding:0 2em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{margin:0 1em 0 0.5em;padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 0 auto;min-height:24px;line-height:22px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;flex:0 1 auto;align-items:baseline;padding:0.2em 0;column-gap:1em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-logo{width:22px;line-height:22px;margin:0 0.2em;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-link{margin:0 0.2em;text-align:left}@media screen and (max-width:960px){.mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:flex;flex-flow:column wrap;font-size:88%;background-color:#fdfdfd;clear:both;margin:1em auto 0;padding:0 2em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 1}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;flex:1;align-items:baseline;padding:0.2em 0;border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;flex:0 0 20em;min-width:20em;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px}}.mw-parser-output .navbox+link+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox+style+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+link+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+style+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.navbox-styles+.portal-bar{margin-top:-1px}Council of Europe at Wikipedia's sister projects:Media from CommonsNews from WikinewsTexts from WikisourceData from Wikidata
Authority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
ISNI
1
VIAF
1
WorldCat
2
National libraries
France (data)
United States
Japan
Czech Republic
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
Microsoft Academic
Social Networks and Archival Context
SUDOC (France)
1
Trove (Australia)
1






Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Council_of_Europe&oldid=1057111005"
		Categories: Council of Europe1949 establishments in EnglandCouncilsInternational organizations based in EuropeInternational organizations based in FranceOrganizations based in StrasbourgOrganizations established in 1949Politics of EuropeUnited Nations General Assembly observersHidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr)CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)CS1 Italian-language sources (it)Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataUse British English from February 2014Use dmy dates from August 2021Articles containing French-language textInfoboxes without native name language parameterArticles needing additional references from May 2017All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2020Official website different in Wikidata and WikipediaPages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatchPages using Sister project links with hidden wikidataArticles with GND identifiersArticles with ISNI identifiersArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WORLDCATID identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiersArticles with HDS identifiersArticles with MA identifiersArticles with SNAC-ID identifiersArticles with SUDOC identifiersArticles with Trove identifiersArticles with multiple identifiers
	