
		From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
		
		
		
		
		Jump to navigation
		Jump to search
		Telecommunication medium for transmitting and receiving moving images
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}This article is about television as a medium. For the appliance itself, see television set.
"TV" redirects here. For other uses, see Television (disambiguation) and TV (disambiguation).




  Flat-screen televisions for sale at a consumer electronics store in 2008.
Television, sometimes shortened to TV or telly, is a telecommunication medium used for transmitting moving images in black-and-white or in color, and in two or three dimensions and sound. The term can refer to a television set, a television show, or the medium of television transmission. Television is a mass medium for advertising, entertainment, news, and sports.
Television became available in crude experimental forms in the late 1920s, but it would still be several years before the new technology would be marketed to consumers. After World War II, an improved form of black-and-white television broadcasting became popular in the United Kingdom and United States, and television sets became commonplace in homes, businesses, and institutions. During the 1950s, television was the primary medium for influencing public opinion.[1] In the mid-1960s, color broadcasting was introduced in the U.S. and most other developed countries. The availability of various types of archival storage media such as Betamax and VHS tapes, high-capacity hard disk drives, DVDs, flash drives, high-definition Blu-ray Discs, and cloud digital video recorders has enabled viewers to watch pre-recorded material—such as movies—at home on their own time schedule. For many reasons, especially the convenience of remote retrieval, the storage of television and video programming now also occurs on the cloud (such as the video on demand service by Netflix). At the end of the first decade of the 2000s, digital television transmissions greatly increased in popularity. Another development was the move from standard-definition television (SDTV) (576i, with 576 interlaced lines of resolution and 480i) to high-definition television (HDTV), which provides a resolution that is substantially higher. HDTV may be transmitted in different formats: 1080p, 1080i and 720p. Since 2010, with the invention of smart television, Internet television has increased the availability of television programs and movies via the Internet through streaming video services such as Netflix, Amazon Video, iPlayer and Hulu.
In 2013, 79% of the world's households owned a television set.[2] The replacement of earlier bulky, high-voltage cathode ray tube (CRT) screen displays with compact, energy-efficient, flat-panel alternative technologies such as LCDs (both fluorescent-backlit and LED), OLED displays, and plasma displays was a hardware revolution that began with computer monitors in the late 1990s. Most television sets sold in the 2000s were flat-panel, mainly LEDs. Major manufacturers announced the discontinuation of CRT, DLP, plasma, and even fluorescent-backlit LCDs by the mid-2010s.[3][4] In the near future, LEDs are expected to be gradually replaced by OLEDs.[5] Also, major manufacturers have announced that they will increasingly produce smart TVs in the mid-2010s.[6][7][8] Smart TVs with integrated Internet and Web 2.0 functions became the dominant form of television by the late 2010s.[9]
Television signals were initially distributed only as terrestrial television using high-powered radio-frequency television transmitters to broadcast the signal to individual television receivers. Alternatively television signals are distributed by coaxial cable or optical fiber, satellite systems and, since the 2000s via the Internet. Until the early 2000s, these were transmitted as analog signals, but a transition to digital television was expected to be completed worldwide by the late 2010s. A standard television set consists of multiple internal electronic circuits, including a tuner for receiving and decoding broadcast signals. A visual display device which lacks a tuner is correctly called a video monitor rather than a television.

Contents

1 Etymology
2 History

2.1 Mechanical
2.2 Electronic
2.3 Color
2.4 Digital
2.5 Smart television
2.6 3D


3 Broadcast systems

3.1 Terrestrial television
3.2 Cable television
3.3 Satellite television
3.4 Internet television


4 Sets

4.1 Display technologies

4.1.1 Disk
4.1.2 CRT
4.1.3 DLP
4.1.4 Plasma
4.1.5 LCD
4.1.6 OLED


4.2 Display resolution

4.2.1 LD
4.2.2 SD
4.2.3 HD
4.2.4 UHD


4.3 Market share


5 Content

5.1 Programming
5.2 Genres
5.3 Funding

5.3.1 Advertising
5.3.2 United States
5.3.3 United Kingdom
5.3.4 Ireland
5.3.5 Subscription
5.3.6 Taxation or license


5.4 Broadcast programming


6 Social aspects

6.1 Opposition


7 Negative impacts
8 See also
9 References
10 Further reading
11 External links



Etymology
The word television comes from Ancient Greek  τῆλε (tele) 'far', and Latin  visio 'sight'.
The first documented usage of the term dates back to 1900, when the Russian scientist Constantin Perskyi used it in a paper that he presented in French at the 1st International Congress of Electricity, which ran from 18 to 25 August 1900 during the International World Fair in Paris.
The Anglicised version of the term is first attested in 1907, when it was still "...a theoretical system to transmit moving images over telegraph or telephone wires".[10] It was "...formed in English or borrowed from French télévision."[10] In the 19th century and early 20th century, other "...proposals for the name of a then-hypothetical technology for sending pictures over distance were telephote (1880) and televista (1904)."[10]
The abbreviation TV is from 1948. The use of the term to mean "a television set" dates from 1941.[10] The use of the term to mean "television as a medium" dates from 1927.[10]
The slang term telly is more common in the UK. The slang term the tube or the boob tube derives from the bulky cathode ray tube used on most TVs until the advent of flat-screen TVs. Another slang term for the TV is "idiot box".[11]
Also, in the 1940s and throughout the 1950s, during the early rapid growth of television programming and television-set ownership in the United States, another slang term became widely used in that period and continues to be used today to distinguish productions originally created for broadcast on television from films developed for presentation in movie theaters.[12] The "small screen", as both a compound adjective and noun, became specific references to television, while the "big screen" was used to identify productions made for theatrical release.[12]

History
Main article: History of television
Mechanical
Main article: Mechanical television
  The Nipkow disk. This schematic shows the circular paths traced by the holes that may also be square for greater precision. The area of the disk outlined in black displays the region scanned.
Facsimile transmission systems for still photographs pioneered methods of mechanical scanning of images in the early 19th century. Alexander Bain introduced the facsimile machine between 1843 and 1846. Frederick Bakewell demonstrated a working laboratory version in 1851.[citation needed] Willoughby Smith discovered the photoconductivity of the element selenium in 1873. As a 23-year-old German university student, Paul Julius Gottlieb Nipkow proposed and patented the Nipkow disk in 1884.[13] This was a spinning disk with a spiral pattern of holes in it, so each hole scanned a line of the image. Although he never built a working model of the system, variations of Nipkow's spinning-disk "image rasterizer" became exceedingly common.[14] Constantin Perskyi had coined the word television in a paper read to the International Electricity Congress at the International World Fair in Paris on 24 August 1900. Perskyi's paper reviewed the existing electromechanical technologies, mentioning the work of Nipkow and others.[15] However, it was not until 1907 that developments in amplification tube technology by Lee de Forest and Arthur Korn, among others, made the design practical.[16]
The first demonstration of the live transmission of images was by Georges Rignoux and A. Fournier in Paris in 1909. A matrix of 64 selenium cells, individually wired to a mechanical commutator, served as an electronic retina. In the receiver, a type of Kerr cell modulated the light and a series of differently angled mirrors attached to the edge of a rotating disc scanned the modulated beam onto the display screen. A separate circuit regulated synchronization. The 8x8 pixel resolution in this proof-of-concept demonstration was just sufficient to clearly transmit individual letters of the alphabet. An updated image was transmitted "several times" each second.[17]
In 1911, Boris Rosing and his student Vladimir Zworykin created a system that used a mechanical mirror-drum scanner to transmit, in Zworykin's words, "very crude images" over wires to the "Braun tube" (cathode ray tube or "CRT") in the receiver. Moving images were not possible because, in the scanner: "the sensitivity was not enough and the selenium cell was very laggy".[18]
In 1921, Edouard Belin sent the first image via radio waves with his belinograph.[19]

  Baird in 1925 with his televisor equipment and dummies "James" and "Stooky Bill" (right).
By the 1920s, when amplification made television practical, Scottish inventor John Logie Baird employed the Nipkow disk in his prototype video systems. On 25 March 1925, Baird gave the first public demonstration of televised silhouette images in motion, at Selfridge's Department Store in London.[20] Since human faces had inadequate contrast to show up on his primitive system, he televised a ventriloquist's dummy named "Stooky Bill", whose painted face had higher contrast, talking and moving. By 26 January 1926, he had demonstrated the transmission of an image of a face in motion by radio. This is widely regarded as the world's first public television demonstration. Baird's system used the Nipkow disk for both scanning the image and displaying it. A brightly illuminated subject was placed in front of a spinning Nipkow disk set with lenses which swept images across a static photocell. The thallium sulphide (Thalofide) cell, developed by Theodore Case in the U.S., detected the light reflected from the subject and converted it into a proportional electrical signal. This was transmitted by AM radio waves to a receiver unit, where the video signal was applied to a neon light behind a second Nipkow disk rotating synchronized with the first. The brightness of the neon lamp was varied in proportion to the brightness of each spot on the image. As each hole in the disk passed by, one scan line of the image was reproduced. Baird's disk had 30 holes, producing an image with only 30 scan lines, just enough to recognize a human face.[citation needed] In 1927, Baird transmitted a signal over 438 miles (705 km) of telephone line between London and Glasgow.[21]
In 1928, Baird's company (Baird Television Development Company/Cinema Television) broadcast the first transatlantic television signal, between London and New York, and the first shore-to-ship transmission. In 1929, he became involved in the first experimental mechanical television service in Germany. In November of the same year, Baird and Bernard Natan of Pathé established France's first television company, Télévision-Baird-Natan. In 1931, he made the first outdoor remote broadcast, of The Derby.[22] In 1932, he demonstrated ultra-short wave television. Baird's mechanical system reached a peak of 240-lines of resolution on BBC telecasts in 1936, though the mechanical system did not scan the televised scene directly. Instead a 17.5mm film was shot, rapidly developed and then scanned while the film was still wet.[citation needed]
A U.S. inventor, Charles Francis Jenkins, also pioneered the television. He published an article on "Motion Pictures by Wireless" in 1913, but it was not until December 1923 that he transmitted moving silhouette images for witnesses; and it was on 13 June 1925, that he publicly demonstrated synchronized transmission of silhouette pictures. In 1925 Jenkins used the Nipkow disk and transmitted the silhouette image of a toy windmill in motion, over a distance of 5 miles (8 km), from a naval radio station in Maryland to his laboratory in Washington, D.C., using a lensed disk scanner with a 48-line resolution.[23][24] He was granted U.S. Patent No. 1,544,156 (Transmitting Pictures over Wireless) on 30 June 1925 (filed 13 March 1922).[25]
Herbert E. Ives and Frank Gray of Bell Telephone Laboratories gave a dramatic demonstration of mechanical television on 7 April 1927. Their reflected-light television system included both small and large viewing screens. The small receiver had a 2-inch-wide by 2.5-inch-high screen (5 by 6 cm). The large receiver had a screen 24 inches wide by 30 inches high (60 by 75 cm). Both sets were capable of reproducing reasonably accurate, monochromatic, moving images. Along with the pictures, the sets received synchronized sound. The system transmitted images over two paths: first, a copper wire link from Washington to New York City, then a radio link from Whippany, New Jersey. Comparing the two transmission methods, viewers noted no difference in quality. Subjects of the telecast included Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover. A flying-spot scanner beam illuminated these subjects. The scanner that produced the beam had a 50-aperture disk. The disc revolved at a rate of 18 frames per second, capturing one frame about every 56 milliseconds. (Today's systems typically transmit 30 or 60 frames per second, or one frame every 33.3 or 16.7 milliseconds respectively.) Television historian Albert Abramson underscored the significance of the Bell Labs demonstration: "It was in fact the best demonstration of a mechanical television system ever made to this time. It would be several years before any other system could even begin to compare with it in picture quality."[26]
In 1928, WRGB, then W2XB, was started as the world's first television station. It broadcast from the General Electric facility in Schenectady, NY. It was popularly known as "WGY Television". Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, Léon Theremin had been developing a mirror drum-based television, starting with 16 lines resolution in 1925, then 32 lines and eventually 64 using interlacing in 1926. As part of his thesis, on 7 May 1926, he electrically transmitted, and then projected, near-simultaneous moving images on a 5-square-foot (0.46 m2) screen.[24]
By 1927, Theremin had achieved an image of 100 lines, a resolution that was not surpassed until May 1932 by RCA, with 120 lines.[27]
On 25 December 1926, Kenjiro Takayanagi demonstrated a television system with a 40-line resolution that employed a Nipkow disk scanner and CRT display at Hamamatsu Industrial High School in Japan. This prototype is still on display at the Takayanagi Memorial Museum in Shizuoka University, Hamamatsu Campus. His research in creating a production model was halted by the SCAP after World War II.[28]
Because only a limited number of holes could be made in the disks, and disks beyond a certain diameter became impractical, image resolution on mechanical television broadcasts was relatively low, ranging from about 30 lines up to 120 or so. Nevertheless, the image quality of 30-line transmissions steadily improved with technical advances, and by 1933 the UK broadcasts using the Baird system were remarkably clear.[29] A few systems ranging into the 200-line region also went on the air. Two of these were the 180-line system that Compagnie des Compteurs (CDC) installed in Paris in 1935, and the 180-line system that Peck Television Corp. started in 1935 at station VE9AK in Montreal.[30][31] The advancement of all-electronic television (including image dissectors and other camera tubes and cathode ray tubes for the reproducer) marked the start of the end for mechanical systems as the dominant form of television. Mechanical television, despite its inferior image quality and generally smaller picture, would remain the primary television technology until the 1930s. The last mechanical telecasts ended in 1939 at stations run by a lot of public universities in the United States.

Electronic
Further information: Video camera tube
In 1897, English physicist J. J. Thomson was able, in his three well-known experiments, to deflect cathode rays, a fundamental function of the modern cathode ray tube (CRT). The earliest version of the CRT was invented by the German physicist Ferdinand Braun in 1897 and is also known as the "Braun" tube.[32] It was a cold-cathode diode, a modification of the Crookes tube, with a phosphor-coated screen. In 1906 the Germans Max Dieckmann and Gustav Glage produced raster images for the first time in a CRT.[33] In 1907, Russian scientist Boris Rosing used a CRT in the receiving end of an experimental video signal to form a picture. He managed to display simple geometric shapes onto the screen.[34]
In 1908 Alan Archibald Campbell-Swinton, fellow of the Royal Society (UK), published a letter in the scientific journal Nature in which he described how "distant electric vision" could be achieved by using a cathode ray tube, or Braun tube, as both a transmitting and receiving device,[35][36] He expanded on his vision in a speech given in London in 1911 and reported in The Times[37] and the Journal of the Röntgen Society.[38][39] In a letter to Nature published in October 1926, Campbell-Swinton also announced the results of some "not very successful experiments" he had conducted with G. M. Minchin and J. C. M. Stanton. They had attempted to generate an electrical signal by projecting an image onto a selenium-coated metal plate that was simultaneously scanned by a cathode ray beam.[40][41] These experiments were conducted before March 1914, when Minchin died,[42] but they were later repeated by two different teams in 1937, by H. Miller and J. W. Strange from EMI,[43] and by H. Iams and A. Rose from RCA.[44] Both teams succeeded in transmitting "very faint" images with the original Campbell-Swinton's selenium-coated plate. Although others had experimented with using a cathode ray tube as a receiver, the concept of using one as a transmitter was novel.[45] The first cathode ray tube to use a hot cathode was developed by John B. Johnson (who gave his name to the term Johnson noise) and Harry Weiner Weinhart of Western Electric, and became a commercial product in 1922.[citation needed]
In 1926, Hungarian engineer Kálmán Tihanyi designed a television system utilizing fully electronic scanning and display elements and employing the principle of "charge storage" within the scanning (or "camera") tube.[46][47][48][49] The problem of low sensitivity to light resulting in low electrical output from transmitting or "camera" tubes would be solved with the introduction of charge-storage technology by Kálmán Tihanyi beginning in 1924.[50] His solution was a camera tube that accumulated and stored electrical charges ("photoelectrons") within the tube throughout each scanning cycle. The device was first described in a patent application he filed in Hungary in March 1926 for a television system he called "Radioskop".[51] After further refinements included in a 1928 patent application,[50] Tihanyi's patent was declared void in Great Britain in 1930,[52] so he applied for patents in the United States. Although his breakthrough would be incorporated into the design of RCA's "iconoscope" in 1931, the U.S. patent for Tihanyi's transmitting tube would not be granted until May 1939. The patent for his receiving tube had been granted the previous October. Both patents had been purchased by RCA prior to their approval.[53][54] Charge storage remains a basic principle in the design of imaging devices for television to the present day.[51] On 25 December 1926, at Hamamatsu Industrial High School in Japan, Japanese inventor Kenjiro Takayanagi demonstrated a TV system with a 40-line resolution that employed a CRT display.[28] This was the first working example of a fully electronic television receiver. Takayanagi did not apply for a patent.[55]
In the 1930s, Allen B. DuMont made the first CRTs to last 1,000 hours of use, which was one of the factors that led to the widespread adoption of television.[56]
On 7 September 1927, U.S. inventor Philo Farnsworth's image dissector camera tube transmitted its first image, a simple straight line, at his laboratory at 202 Green Street in San Francisco.[57][58] By 3 September 1928, Farnsworth had developed the system sufficiently to hold a demonstration for the press. This is widely regarded as the first electronic television demonstration.[58] In 1929, the system was improved further by the elimination of a motor generator, so that his television system now had no mechanical parts.[59] That year, Farnsworth transmitted the first live human images with his system, including a three and a half-inch image of his wife Elma ("Pem") with her eyes closed (possibly due to the bright lighting required).[60]

  Vladimir Zworykin demonstrates electronic television (1929)
Meanwhile, Vladimir Zworykin was also experimenting with the cathode ray tube to create and show images. While working for Westinghouse Electric in 1923, he began to develop an electronic camera tube. But in a 1925 demonstration, the image was dim, had low contrast, and poor definition, and was stationary.[61] Zworykin's imaging tube never got beyond the laboratory stage. But RCA, which acquired the Westinghouse patent, asserted that the patent for Farnsworth's 1927 image dissector was written so broadly that it would exclude any other electronic imaging device. Thus RCA, on the basis of Zworykin's 1923 patent application, filed a patent interference suit against Farnsworth. The U.S. Patent Office examiner disagreed in a 1935 decision, finding priority of invention for Farnsworth against Zworykin. Farnsworth claimed that Zworykin's 1923 system would be unable to produce an electrical image of the type to challenge his patent. Zworykin received a patent in 1928 for a color transmission version of his 1923 patent application;[62] he also divided his original application in 1931.[63] Zworykin was unable or unwilling to introduce evidence of a working model of his tube that was based on his 1923 patent application. In September 1939, after losing an appeal in the courts, and determined to go forward with the commercial manufacturing of television equipment, RCA agreed to pay Farnsworth US$1 million over a ten-year period, in addition to license payments, to use his patents.[64][65]
In 1933, RCA introduced an improved camera tube that relied on Tihanyi's charge storage principle.[66] Called the "Iconoscope" by Zworykin, the new tube had a light sensitivity of about 75,000 lux, and thus was claimed to be much more sensitive than Farnsworth's image dissector.[citation needed] However, Farnsworth had overcome his power issues with his Image Dissector through the invention of a completely unique "multipactor" device that he began work on in 1930, and demonstrated in 1931.[67][68] This small tube could amplify a signal reportedly to the 60th power or better[69] and showed great promise in all fields of electronics. Unfortunately, an issue with the multipactor was that it wore out at an unsatisfactory rate.[70]
At the Berlin Radio Show in August 1931, Manfred von Ardenne gave a public demonstration of a television system using a CRT for both transmission and reception. However, Ardenne had not developed a camera tube, using the CRT instead as a flying-spot scanner to scan slides and film.[71] Philo Farnsworth gave the world's first public demonstration of an all-electronic television system, using a live camera, at the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia on 25 August 1934, and for ten days afterwards.[72][73] Mexican inventor Guillermo González Camarena also played an important role in early television. His experiments with television (known as telectroescopía at first) began in 1931 and led to a patent for the "trichromatic field sequential system" color television in 1940.[74] In Britain, the EMI engineering team led by Isaac Shoenberg applied in 1932 for a patent for a new device they called "the Emitron",[75][76] which formed the heart of the cameras they designed for the BBC. On 2 November 1936, a 405-line broadcasting service employing the Emitron began at studios in Alexandra Palace, and transmitted from a specially built mast atop one of the Victorian building's towers. It alternated for a short time with Baird's mechanical system in adjoining studios, but was more reliable and visibly superior. This was the world's first regular "high-definition" television service.[77]
The original U.S. iconoscope was noisy, had a high ratio of interference to signal, and ultimately gave disappointing results, especially when compared to the high definition mechanical scanning systems then becoming available.[78][79] The EMI team, under the supervision of Isaac Shoenberg, analyzed how the iconoscope (or Emitron) produces an electronic signal and concluded that its real efficiency was only about 5% of the theoretical maximum.[80][81] They solved this problem by developing, and patenting in 1934, two new camera tubes dubbed super-Emitron and CPS Emitron.[82][83][84] The super-Emitron was between ten and fifteen times more sensitive than the original Emitron and iconoscope tubes and, in some cases, this ratio was considerably greater.[80] It was used for outside broadcasting by the BBC, for the first time, on Armistice Day 1937, when the general public could watch on a television set as the King laid a wreath at the Cenotaph.[85] This was the first time that anyone had broadcast a live street scene from cameras installed on the roof of neighboring buildings, because neither Farnsworth nor RCA would do the same until the 1939 New York World's Fair.

  Ad for the beginning of experimental television broadcasting in New York City by RCA in 1939
  Indian-head test pattern used during the black-and-white era before 1970. It was displayed when a television station first signed on every day.
On the other hand, in 1934, Zworykin shared some patent rights with the German licensee company Telefunken.[86] The "image iconoscope" ("Superikonoskop" in Germany) was produced as a result of the collaboration. This tube is essentially identical to the super-Emitron.[citation needed] The production and commercialization of the super-Emitron and image iconoscope in Europe were not affected by the patent war between Zworykin and Farnsworth, because Dieckmann and Hell had priority in Germany for the invention of the image dissector, having submitted a patent application for their Lichtelektrische Bildzerlegerröhre für Fernseher (Photoelectric Image Dissector Tube for Television) in Germany in 1925,[87] two years before Farnsworth did the same in the United States.[88] The image iconoscope (Superikonoskop) became the industrial standard for public broadcasting in Europe from 1936 until 1960, when it was replaced by the vidicon and plumbicon tubes. Indeed, it was the representative of the European tradition in electronic tubes competing against the American tradition represented by the image orthicon.[89][90] The German company Heimann produced the Superikonoskop for the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games,[91][92] later Heimann also produced and commercialized it from 1940 to 1955;[93] finally the Dutch company Philips produced and commercialized the image iconoscope and multicon from 1952 to 1958.[90][94]
U.S. television broadcasting, at the time, consisted of a variety of markets in a wide range of sizes, each competing for programming and dominance with separate technology, until deals were made and standards agreed upon in 1941.[95] RCA, for example, used only Iconoscopes in the New York area, but Farnsworth Image Dissectors in Philadelphia and San Francisco.[96] In September 1939, RCA agreed to pay the Farnsworth Television and Radio Corporation royalties over the next ten years for access to Farnsworth's patents.[97] With this historic agreement in place, RCA integrated much of what was best about the Farnsworth Technology into their systems.[96] In 1941, the United States implemented 525-line television.[98][99] Electrical engineer Benjamin Adler played a prominent role in the development of television.[100][101]
The world's first 625-line television standard was designed in the Soviet Union in 1944 and became a national standard in 1946.[102] The first broadcast in 625-line standard occurred in Moscow in 1948.[103] The concept of 625 lines per frame was subsequently implemented in the European CCIR standard.[104] In 1936, Kálmán Tihanyi described the principle of plasma display, the first flat panel display system.[105][106]
Early electronic television sets were large and bulky, with analog circuits made of vacuum tubes. Following the invention of the first working transistor at Bell Labs, Sony founder Masaru Ibuka predicted in 1952 that the transition to electronic circuits made of transistors would lead to smaller and more portable television sets.[107] The first fully transistorized, portable solid-state television set was the 8-inch Sony TV8-301, developed in 1959 and released in 1960.[108][109] This began the transformation of television viewership from a communal viewing experience to a solitary viewing experience.[110] By 1960, Sony had sold over 4 million portable television sets worldwide.[111]


Color
Main article: Color television
  Samsung LED TV
The basic idea of using three monochrome images to produce a color image had been experimented with almost as soon as black-and-white televisions had first been built. Although he gave no practical details, among the earliest published proposals for television was one by Maurice Le Blanc, in 1880, for a color system, including the first mentions in television literature of line and frame scanning.[112] Polish inventor Jan Szczepanik patented a color television system in 1897, using a selenium photoelectric cell at the transmitter and an electromagnet controlling an oscillating mirror and a moving prism at the receiver. But his system contained no means of analyzing the spectrum of colors at the transmitting end, and could not have worked as he described it.[113] Another inventor, Hovannes Adamian, also experimented with color television as early as 1907. The first color television project is claimed by him,[114] and was patented in Germany on 31 March 1908, patent No. 197183, then in Britain, on 1 April 1908, patent No. 7219,[115] in France (patent No. 390326) and in Russia in 1910 (patent No. 17912).[116]
Scottish inventor John Logie Baird demonstrated the world's first color transmission on 3 July 1928, using scanning discs at the transmitting and receiving ends with three spirals of apertures, each spiral with filters of a different primary color; and three light sources at the receiving end, with a commutator to alternate their illumination.[117] Baird also made the world's first color broadcast on 4 February 1938, sending a mechanically scanned 120-line image from Baird's Crystal Palace studios to a projection screen at London's Dominion Theatre.[118] Mechanically scanned color television was also demonstrated by Bell Laboratories in June 1929 using three complete systems of photoelectric cells, amplifiers, glow-tubes, and color filters, with a series of mirrors to superimpose the red, green, and blue images into one full color image.
The first practical hybrid system was again pioneered by John Logie Baird. In 1940 he publicly demonstrated a color television combining a traditional black-and-white display with a rotating colored disk. This device was very "deep", but was later improved with a mirror folding the light path into an entirely practical device resembling a large conventional console.[119] However, Baird was unhappy with the design, and, as early as 1944, had commented to a British government committee that a fully electronic device would be better.
In 1939, Hungarian engineer Peter Carl Goldmark introduced an electro-mechanical system while at CBS, which contained an Iconoscope sensor. The CBS field-sequential color system was partly mechanical, with a disc made of red, blue, and green filters spinning inside the television camera at 1,200 rpm, and a similar disc spinning in synchronization in front of the cathode ray tube inside the receiver set.[120] The system was first demonstrated to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) on 29 August 1940, and shown to the press on 4 September.[121][122][123][124]
CBS began experimental color field tests using film as early as August 28, 1940, and live cameras by 12 November.[122][125] NBC (owned by RCA) made its first field test of color television on February 20, 1941. CBS began daily color field tests on June 1, 1941.[126] These color systems were not compatible with existing black-and-white television sets, and, as no color television sets were available to the public at this time, viewing of the color field tests was restricted to RCA and CBS engineers and the invited press. The War Production Board halted the manufacture of television and radio equipment for civilian use from April 22, 1942, to 20 August 1945, limiting any opportunity to introduce color television to the general public.[127][128]
As early as 1940, Baird had started work on a fully electronic system he called Telechrome. Early Telechrome devices used two electron guns aimed at either side of a phosphor plate. The phosphor was patterned so the electrons from the guns only fell on one side of the patterning or the other. Using cyan and magenta phosphors, a reasonable limited-color image could be obtained. He also demonstrated the same system using monochrome signals to produce a 3D image (called "stereoscopic" at the time). A demonstration on 16 August 1944 was the first example of a practical color television system. Work on the Telechrome continued and plans were made to introduce a three-gun version for full color. However, Baird's untimely death in 1946 ended development of the Telechrome system.[129][130]
Similar concepts were common through the 1940s and 1950s, differing primarily in the way they re-combined the colors generated by the three guns. The Geer tube was similar to Baird's concept, but used small pyramids with the phosphors deposited on their outside faces, instead of Baird's 3D patterning on a flat surface. The Penetron used three layers of phosphor on top of each other and increased the power of the beam to reach the upper layers when drawing those colors. The Chromatron used a set of focusing wires to select the colored phosphors arranged in vertical stripes on the tube.
One of the great technical challenges of introducing color broadcast television was the desire to conserve bandwidth, potentially three times that of the existing black-and-white standards, and not use an excessive amount of radio spectrum. In the United States, after considerable research, the National Television Systems Committee[131] approved an all-electronic system developed by RCA, which encoded the color information separately from the brightness information and greatly reduced the resolution of the color information in order to conserve bandwidth. As black-and-white televisions could receive the same transmission and display it in black-and-white, the color system adopted is [backwards] "compatible". ("Compatible Color", featured in RCA advertisements of the period, is mentioned in the song "America", of West Side Story, 1957.) The brightness image remained compatible with existing black-and-white television sets at slightly reduced resolution, while color televisions could decode the extra information in the signal and produce a limited-resolution color display. The higher resolution black-and-white and lower resolution color images combine in the brain to produce a seemingly high-resolution color image. The NTSC standard represented a major technical achievement.

  Color bars used in a test pattern, sometimes used when no program material is available.
The first color broadcast (the first episode of the live program The Marriage) occurred on 8 July 1954, but during the following ten years most network broadcasts, and nearly all local programming, continued to be in black-and-white. It was not until the mid-1960s that color sets started selling in large numbers, due in part to the color transition of 1965 in which it was announced that over half of all network prime-time programming would be broadcast in color that fall. The first all-color prime-time season came just one year later. In 1972, the last holdout among daytime network programs converted to color, resulting in the first completely all-color network season.
Early color sets were either floor-standing console models or tabletop versions nearly as bulky and heavy, so in practice they remained firmly anchored in one place. GE's relatively compact and lightweight Porta-Color set was introduced in the spring of 1966. It used a transistor-based UHF tuner.[132] The first fully transistorized color television in the United States was the Quasar television introduced in 1967.[133] These developments made watching color television a more flexible and convenient proposition.
The MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor, or MOS transistor) was invented by Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959,[134] and presented in 1960.[135] By the mid-1960s, RCA were using MOSFETs in their consumer television products.[136] RCA Laboratories researchers W.M. Austin, J.A. Dean, D.M. Griswold and O.P. Hart in 1966 described the use of the MOSFET in television circuits, including RF amplifier, low-level video, chroma and AGC circuits.[137] The power MOSFET was later widely adopted for television receiver circuits.[138]
In 1972, sales of color sets finally surpassed sales of black-and-white sets. Color broadcasting in Europe was not standardized on the PAL format until the 1960s, and broadcasts did not start until 1967. By this point many of the technical issues in the early sets had been worked out, and the spread of color sets in Europe was fairly rapid. By the mid-1970s, the only stations broadcasting in black-and-white were a few high-numbered UHF stations in small markets, and a handful of low-power repeater stations in even smaller markets such as vacation spots. By 1979, even the last of these had converted to color and, by the early 1980s, B&W sets had been pushed into niche markets, notably low-power uses, small portable sets, or for use as video monitor screens in lower-cost consumer equipment. By the late 1980s even these areas switched to color sets.

Digital
Main article: Digital television
See also: Digital television transition
Digital television (DTV) is the transmission of audio and video by digitally processed and multiplexed signals, in contrast to the totally analog and channel separated signals used by analog television. Due to data compression, digital television can support more than one program in the same channel bandwidth.[139] It is an innovative service that represents the most significant evolution in television broadcast technology since color television emerged in the 1950s.[140] Digital television's roots have been tied very closely to the availability of inexpensive, high performance computers. It was not until the 1990s that digital television became possible.[141] Digital television was previously not practically possible due to the impractically high bandwidth requirements of uncompressed digital video,[142][143] requiring around 200 Mbit/s for a standard-definition television (SDTV) signal,[142] and over 1 Gbit/s for high-definition television (HDTV).[143]
Digital television became practically possible in the early 1990s due to a major technological development, discrete cosine transform (DCT) video compression.[142][143] DCT coding is a lossy compression technique that was first proposed for image compression by Nasir Ahmed in 1972,[144] and was later adapted into a motion-compensated DCT video coding algorithm, for video coding standards such as the H.26x formats from 1988 onwards and the MPEG formats from 1991 onwards.[145][146] Motion-compensated DCT video compression significantly reduced the amount of bandwidth required for a digital television signal.[142][143] DCT coding compressed down the bandwidth requirements of digital television signals to about 34  Mbit/s for SDTV and around 70–140 Mbit/s for HDTV while maintaining near-studio-quality transmission, making digital television a practical reality in the 1990s.[143]
A digital television service was proposed in 1986 by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) and the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunication (MPT) in Japan, where there were plans to develop an "Integrated Network System" service. However, it was not possible to practically implement such a digital television service until the adoption of DCT video compression technology made it possible in the early 1990s.[142]
In the mid-1980s, as Japanese consumer electronics firms forged ahead with the development of HDTV technology, the MUSE analog format proposed by NHK, a Japanese company, was seen as a pacesetter that threatened to eclipse U.S. electronics companies' technologies. Until June 1990, the Japanese MUSE standard, based on an analog system, was the front-runner among the more than 23 other technical concepts under consideration. Then, a U.S. company, General Instrument, demonstrated the possibility of a digital television signal. This breakthrough was of such significance that the FCC was persuaded to delay its decision on an ATV standard until a digitally-based standard could be developed.
In March 1990, when it became clear that a digital standard was possible, the FCC made a number of critical decisions. First, the Commission declared that the new ATV standard must be more than an enhanced analog signal, but be able to provide a genuine HDTV signal with at least twice the resolution of existing television images.(7) Then, to ensure that viewers who did not wish to buy a new digital television set could continue to receive conventional television broadcasts, it dictated that the new ATV standard must be capable of being "simulcast" on different channels.(8)The new ATV standard also allowed the new DTV signal to be based on entirely new design principles. Although incompatible with the existing NTSC standard, the new DTV standard would be able to incorporate many improvements.
The last standards adopted by the FCC did not require a single standard for scanning formats, aspect ratios, or lines of resolution. This compromise resulted from a dispute between the consumer electronics industry (joined by some broadcasters) and the computer industry (joined by the film industry and some public interest groups) over which of the two scanning processes—interlaced or progressive—would be best suited for the newer digital HDTV compatible display devices.[147] Interlaced scanning, which had been specifically designed for older analogue CRT display technologies, scans even-numbered lines first, then odd-numbered ones. In fact, interlaced scanning can be looked at as the first video compression model as it was partly designed in the 1940s to double the image resolution to exceed the limitations of the television broadcast bandwidth. Another reason for its adoption was to limit the flickering on early CRT screens whose phosphor coated screens could only retain the image from the electron scanning gun for a relatively short duration.[148] However interlaced scanning does not work as efficiently on newer display devices such as Liquid-crystal (LCD), for example, which are better suited to a more frequent progressive refresh rate.[147]
Progressive scanning, the format that the computer industry had long adopted for computer display monitors, scans every line in sequence, from top to bottom. Progressive scanning in effect doubles the amount of data generated for every full screen displayed in comparison to interlaced scanning by painting the screen in one pass in 1/60-second, instead of two passes in 1/30-second. The computer industry argued that progressive scanning is superior because it does not "flicker" on the new standard of display devices in the manner of interlaced scanning. It also argued that progressive scanning enables easier connections with the Internet, and is more cheaply converted to interlaced formats than vice versa. The film industry also supported progressive scanning because it offered a more efficient means of converting filmed programming into digital formats. For their part, the consumer electronics industry and broadcasters argued that interlaced scanning was the only technology that could transmit the highest quality pictures then (and currently) feasible, i.e., 1,080 lines per picture and 1,920 pixels per line. Broadcasters also favored interlaced scanning because their vast archive of interlaced programming is not readily compatible with a progressive format. William F. Schreiber, who was director of the Advanced Television Research Program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from 1983 until his retirement in 1990, thought that the continued advocacy of interlaced equipment originated from consumer electronics companies that were trying to get back the substantial investments they made in the interlaced technology.[149]
Digital television transition started in late 2000s. All governments across the world set the deadline for analog shutdown by 2010s. Initially, the adoption rate was low, as the first digital tuner-equipped television sets were costly. But soon, as the price of digital-capable television sets dropped, more and more households were converting to digital television sets. The transition is expected to be completed worldwide by mid to late 2010s.

Smart television
Main article: Smart television
Not to be confused with Internet television, Internet Protocol television, or Web television.
  A smart TV
The advent of digital television allowed innovations like smart television sets. A smart television, sometimes referred to as connected TV or hybrid TV, is a television set or set-top box with integrated Internet and Web 2.0 features, and is an example of technological convergence between computers, television sets and set-top boxes. Besides the traditional functions of television sets and set-top boxes provided through traditional Broadcasting media, these devices can also provide Internet TV, online interactive media, over-the-top content, as well as on-demand streaming media, and home networking access. These TVs come pre-loaded with an operating system.[9][150][151][152]
Smart TV should not to be confused with Internet TV, Internet Protocol television (IPTV) or with Web TV. Internet television refers to the receiving of television content over the Internet instead of by traditional systems—terrestrial, cable and satellite (although internet itself is received by these methods). IPTV is one of the emerging Internet television technology standards for use by television networks. Web television (WebTV) is a term used for programs created by a wide variety of companies and individuals for broadcast on Internet TV. A first patent was filed in 1994[153] (and extended the following year)[154] for an "intelligent" television system, linked with data processing systems, by means of a digital or analog network. Apart from being linked to data networks, one key point is its ability to automatically download necessary software routines, according to a user's demand, and process their needs. Major TV manufacturers have announced production of smart TVs only, for middle-end and high-end TVs in 2015.[6][7][8] Smart TVs have gotten more affordable compared to when they were first introduced, with 46 million of U.S. households having at least one as of 2019.[155]

3D
Main article: 3D television
3D television conveys depth perception to the viewer by employing techniques such as stereoscopic display, multi-view display, 2D-plus-depth, or any other form of 3D display. Most modern 3D television sets use an active shutter 3D system or a polarized 3D system, and some are autostereoscopic without the need of glasses. Stereoscopic 3D television was demonstrated for the first time on 10 August 1928, by John Logie Baird in his company's premises at 133 Long Acre, London.[156] Baird pioneered a variety of 3D television systems using electromechanical and cathode-ray tube techniques. The first 3D television was produced in 1935. The advent of digital television in the 2000s greatly improved 3D television sets. Although 3D television sets are quite popular for watching 3D home media such as on Blu-ray discs, 3D programming has largely failed to make inroads with the public. Many 3D television channels which started in the early 2010s were shut down by the mid-2010s. According to DisplaySearch 3D televisions shipments totaled 41.45 million units in 2012, compared with 24.14 in 2011 and 2.26 in 2010.[157] As of late 2013, the number of 3D TV viewers started to decline.[158][159][160][161][162]

Broadcast systems
Terrestrial television
Main article: Terrestrial television
See also: Timeline of the introduction of television in countries
  A modern high gain UHF Yagi television antenna. It has 17 directors, and one reflector (made of 4 rods) shaped as a corner reflector.
Programming is broadcast by television stations, sometimes called "channels", as stations are licensed by their governments to broadcast only over assigned channels in the television band. At first, terrestrial broadcasting was the only way television could be widely distributed, and because bandwidth was limited, i.e., there were only a small number of channels available, government regulation was the norm. In the U.S., the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) allowed stations to broadcast advertisements beginning in July 1941, but required public service programming commitments as a requirement for a license. By contrast, the United Kingdom chose a different route, imposing a television license fee on owners of television reception equipment to fund the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), which had public service as part of its Royal Charter.
WRGB claims to be the world's oldest television station, tracing its roots to an experimental station founded on 13 January 1928, broadcasting from the General Electric factory in Schenectady, NY, under the call letters W2XB.[163] It was popularly known as "WGY Television" after its sister radio station. Later in 1928, General Electric started a second facility, this one in New York City, which had the call letters W2XBS and which today is known as WNBC. The two stations were experimental in nature and had no regular programming, as receivers were operated by engineers within the company. The image of a Felix the Cat doll rotating on a turntable was broadcast for 2 hours every day for several years as new technology was being tested by the engineers. On 2 November 1936, the BBC began transmitting the world's first public regular high-definition service from the Victorian Alexandra Palace in north London.[164] It therefore claims to be the birthplace of television broadcasting as we know it from now on.
With the widespread adoption of cable across the United States in the 1970s and 1980s, terrestrial television broadcasts have been in decline; in 2013 it was estimated that about 7% of US households used an antenna.[165][166] A slight increase in use began around 2010 due to switchover to digital terrestrial television broadcasts, which offered pristine image quality over very large areas, and offered an alternate to cable television (CATV) for cord cutters. All other countries around the world are also in the process of either shutting down analog terrestrial television or switching over to digital terrestrial television.

Cable television
Main article: Cable television See also: Cable television by region
  Coaxial cable is used to carry cable television signals into cathode ray tube and flat panel television sets.
Cable television is a system of broadcasting television programming to paying subscribers via radio frequency (RF) signals transmitted through coaxial cables or light pulses through fiber-optic cables. This contrasts with traditional terrestrial television, in which the television signal is transmitted over the air by radio waves and received by a television antenna attached to the television. In the 2000s, FM radio programming, high-speed Internet, telephone service, and similar non-television services may also be provided through these cables. The abbreviation CATV is sometimes used for cable television in the United States. It originally stood for Community Access Television or Community Antenna Television, from cable television's origins in 1948: in areas where over-the-air reception was limited by distance from transmitters or mountainous terrain, large "community antennas" were constructed, and cable was run from them to individual homes.[167]

Satellite television
Main article: Satellite television
  DBS satellite dishes installed on an apartment complex.
Satellite television is a system of supplying television programming using broadcast signals relayed from communication satellites. The signals are received via an outdoor parabolic reflector antenna usually referred to as a satellite dish and a low-noise block downconverter (LNB). A satellite receiver then decodes the desired television program for viewing on a television set. Receivers can be external set-top boxes, or a built-in television tuner. Satellite television provides a wide range of channels and services, especially to geographic areas without terrestrial television or cable television.
The most common method of reception is direct-broadcast satellite television (DBSTV), also known as "direct to home" (DTH).[168] In DBSTV systems, signals are relayed from a direct broadcast satellite on the Ku wavelength and are completely digital.[169] Satellite TV systems formerly used systems known as television receive-only. These systems received analog signals transmitted in the C-band spectrum from FSS type satellites, and required the use of large dishes. Consequently, these systems were nicknamed "big dish" systems, and were more expensive and less popular.[170]
The direct-broadcast satellite television signals were earlier analog signals and later digital signals, both of which require a compatible receiver. Digital signals may include high-definition television (HDTV). Some transmissions and channels are free-to-air or free-to-view, while many other channels are pay television requiring a subscription.[171]
In 1945, British science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke proposed a worldwide communications system which would function by means of three satellites equally spaced apart in earth orbit.[172][173] This was published in the October 1945 issue of the Wireless World magazine and won him the Franklin Institute's Stuart Ballantine Medal in 1963.[174][175]
The first satellite television signals from Europe to North America were relayed via the Telstar satellite over the Atlantic ocean on 23 July 1962.[176] The signals were received and broadcast in North American and European countries and watched by over 100 million.[176] Launched in 1962, the Relay 1 satellite was the first satellite to transmit television signals from the US to Japan.[177] The first geosynchronous communication satellite, Syncom 2, was launched on 26 July 1963.[178]
The world's first commercial communications satellite, called Intelsat I and nicknamed "Early Bird", was launched into geosynchronous orbit on 6 April 1965.[179] The first national network of television satellites, called Orbita, was created by the Soviet Union in October 1967, and was based on the principle of using the highly elliptical Molniya satellite for rebroadcasting and delivering of television signals to ground downlink stations.[180] The first commercial North American satellite to carry television transmissions was Canada's geostationary Anik 1, which was launched on 9 November 1972.[181] ATS-6, the world's first experimental educational and Direct Broadcast Satellite (DBS), was launched on 30 May 1974.[182] It transmitted at 860 MHz using wideband FM modulation and had two sound channels. The transmissions were focused on the Indian subcontinent but experimenters were able to receive the signal in Western Europe using home constructed equipment that drew on UHF television design techniques already in use.[183]
The first in a series of Soviet geostationary satellites to carry Direct-To-Home television, Ekran 1, was launched on 26 October 1976.[184] It used a 714 MHz UHF downlink frequency so that the transmissions could be received with existing UHF television technology rather than microwave technology.[185]

Internet television
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (March 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Main article: Streaming television
Not to be confused with Smart television, Internet Protocol television, or Web television.
Internet television (Internet TV) (or online television) is the digital distribution of television content via the Internet as opposed to traditional systems like terrestrial, cable, and satellite, although the Internet itself is received by terrestrial, cable, or satellite methods. Internet television is a general term that covers the delivery of television series, and other video content, over the Internet by video streaming technology, typically by major traditional television broadcasters. Internet television should not be confused with Smart TV, IPTV or with Web TV. Smart television refers to the television set which has a built-in operating system. Internet Protocol television (IPTV) is one of the emerging Internet television technology standards for use by television networks. Web television is a term used for programs created by a wide variety of companies and individuals for broadcast on Internet television.

Sets
Main article: Television set
  RCA 630-TS, the first mass-produced television set, which sold in 1946–1947
A television set, also called a television receiver, television, TV set, TV, or "telly", is a device that combines a tuner, display, an amplifier, and speakers for the purpose of viewing television and hearing its audio components. Introduced in the late 1920s in mechanical form, television sets became a popular consumer product after World War II in electronic form, using cathode ray tubes. The addition of color to broadcast television after 1953 further increased the popularity of television sets and an outdoor antenna became a common feature of suburban homes. The ubiquitous television set became the display device for recorded media in the 1970s, such as Betamax and VHS, which enabled viewers to record TV shows and watch prerecorded movies. In the subsequent decades, Television sets were used to watch DVDs and Blu-ray Discs of movies and other content. Major TV manufacturers announced the discontinuation of CRT, DLP, plasma and fluorescent-backlit LCDs by the mid-2010s. Televisions since 2010s mostly use LEDs.[3][4][186][187] LEDs are expected to be gradually replaced by OLEDs in the near future.[5]

Display technologies
Main article: Display device
Disk
Main article: Nipkow disk
The earliest systems employed a spinning disk to create and reproduce images.[188] These usually had a low resolution and screen size and never became popular with the public.

CRT
Main article: Cathode ray tube
  A 14-inch cathode ray tube showing its deflection coils and electron guns
The cathode ray tube (CRT) is a vacuum tube containing one or more electron guns (a source of electrons or electron emitter) and a fluorescent screen used to view images.[34] It has a means to accelerate and deflect the electron beam(s) onto the screen to create the images. The images may represent electrical waveforms (oscilloscope), pictures (television, computer monitor), radar targets or others. The CRT uses an evacuated glass envelope which is large, deep (i.e. long from front screen face to rear end), fairly heavy, and relatively fragile. As a matter of safety, the face is typically made of thick lead glass so as to be highly shatter-resistant and to block most X-ray emissions, particularly if the CRT is used in a consumer product.
In television sets and computer monitors, the entire front area of the tube is scanned repetitively and systematically in a fixed pattern called a raster. An image is produced by controlling the intensity of each of the three electron beams, one for each additive primary color (red, green, and blue) with a video signal as a reference.[189] In all modern CRT monitors and televisions, the beams are bent by magnetic deflection, a varying magnetic field generated by coils and driven by electronic circuits around the neck of the tube, although electrostatic deflection is commonly used in oscilloscopes, a type of diagnostic instrument.[189]

DLP
Main article: Digital Light Processing
  The Christie Mirage 5000, a 2001 DLP projector.
Digital Light Processing (DLP) is a type of video projector technology that uses a digital micromirror device. Some DLPs have a TV tuner, which makes them a type of TV display. It was originally developed in 1987 by Dr. Larry Hornbeck of Texas Instruments. While the DLP imaging device was invented by Texas Instruments, the first DLP based projector was introduced by Digital Projection Ltd in 1997. Digital Projection and Texas Instruments were both awarded Emmy Awards in 1998 for invention of the DLP projector technology. DLP is used in a variety of display applications from traditional static displays to interactive displays and also non-traditional embedded applications including medical, security, and industrial uses. DLP technology is used in DLP front projectors (standalone projection units for classrooms and business primarily), but also in private homes; in these cases, the image is projected onto a projection screen. DLP is also used in DLP rear projection television sets and digital signs. It is also used in about 85% of digital cinema projection.[190]

Plasma
Main article: Plasma display
A plasma display panel (PDP) is a type of flat panel display common to large television displays 30 inches (76 cm) or larger. They are called "plasma" displays because the technology utilizes small cells containing electrically charged ionized gases, or what are in essence chambers more commonly known as fluorescent lamps.


LCD
Main article: Liquid crystal display
  A generic LCD TV, with speakers on either side of the screen.
Liquid-crystal-display televisions (LCD TV) are television sets that use LCD display technology to produce images. LCD televisions are much thinner and lighter than cathode ray tube (CRTs) of similar display size, and are available in much larger sizes (e.g., 90-inch diagonal). When manufacturing costs fell, this combination of features made LCDs practical for television receivers. LCDs come in two types: those using cold cathode fluorescent lamps, simply called LCDs and those using LED as backlight called as LEDs.
In 2007, LCD television sets surpassed sales of CRT-based television sets worldwide for the first time, and their sales figures relative to other technologies accelerated. LCD television sets have quickly displaced the only major competitors in the large-screen market, the Plasma display panel and rear-projection television.[191] In mid 2010s LCDs especially LEDs became, by far, the most widely produced and sold television display type.[186][187] LCDs also have disadvantages. Other technologies address these weaknesses, including OLEDs, FED and SED, but as of 2014[update] none of these have entered widespread production.

OLED
Main article: Organic light-emitting diode
  OLED TV
An OLED (organic light-emitting diode) is a light-emitting diode (LED) in which the emissive electroluminescent layer is a film of organic compound which emits light in response to an electric current. This layer of organic semiconductor is situated between two electrodes. Generally, at least one of these electrodes is transparent. OLEDs are used to create digital displays in devices such as television screens. It is also used for computer monitors, portable systems such as mobile phones, handheld game consoles and PDAs.
There are two main groups of OLED: those based on small molecules and those employing polymers. Adding mobile ions to an OLED creates a light-emitting electrochemical cell or LEC, which has a slightly different mode of operation. OLED displays can use either passive-matrix (PMOLED) or active-matrix (AMOLED) addressing schemes. Active-matrix OLEDs require a thin-film transistor backplane to switch each individual pixel on or off, but allow for higher resolution and larger display sizes.
An OLED display works without a backlight. Thus, it can display deep black levels and can be thinner and lighter than a liquid crystal display (LCD). In low ambient light conditions such as a dark room an OLED screen can achieve a higher contrast ratio than an LCD, whether the LCD uses cold cathode fluorescent lamps or LED backlight. OLEDs are expected to replace other forms of display in near future.[5]

Display resolution
  Comparison of 8K UHDTV, 4K UHDTV, HDTV and SDTV resolution
LD
Main article: Low-definition television
Low-definition television or LDTV refers to television systems that have a lower screen resolution than standard-definition television systems such 240p (320*240). It is used in handheld television. The most common source of LDTV programming is the Internet, where mass distribution of higher-resolution video files could overwhelm computer servers and take too long to download. Many mobile phones and portable devices such as Apple's iPod Nano, or Sony's PlayStation Portable use LDTV video, as higher-resolution files would be excessive to the needs of their small screens (320×240 and 480×272 pixels respectively). The current generation of iPod Nanos have LDTV screens, as do the first three generations of iPod Touch and iPhone (480×320). For the first years of its existence, YouTube offered only one, low-definition resolution of 320x240p at 30fps or less. A standard, consumer grade videotape can be considered SDTV due to its resolution (approximately 360 × 480i/576i).

SD
Main article: Standard-definition television
Standard-definition television or SDTV refers to two different resolutions: 576i, with 576 interlaced lines of resolution, derived from the European-developed PAL and SECAM systems; and 480i based on the American National Television System Committee NTSC system. SDTV is a television system that uses a resolution that is not considered to be either high-definition television (720p, 1080i, 1080p, 1440p, 4K UHDTV, and 8K UHD) or enhanced-definition television (EDTV 480p). In North America, digital SDTV is broadcast in the same 4:3 aspect ratio as NTSC signals with widescreen content being center cut.[192] However, in other parts of the world that used the PAL or SECAM color systems, standard-definition television is now usually shown with a 16:9 aspect ratio, with the transition occurring between the mid-1990s and mid-2000s. Older programs with a 4:3 aspect ratio are shown in the United States as 4:3 with non-ATSC countries preferring to reduce the horizontal resolution by anamorphically scaling a pillarboxed image.

HD
Main article: High-definition television
High-definition television (HDTV) provides a resolution that is substantially higher than that of standard-definition television.
HDTV may be transmitted in various formats:

1080p: 1920×1080p: 2,073,600 pixels (~2.07 megapixels) per frame
1080i: 1920×1080i: 1,036,800 pixels (~1.04 MP) per field or 2,073,600 pixels (~2.07 MP) per frame
A non-standard CEA resolution exists in some countries such as 1440×1080i: 777,600 pixels (~0.78 MP) per field or 1,555,200 pixels (~1.56 MP) per frame
720p: 1280×720p: 921,600 pixels (~0.92 MP) per frame
UHD
Main article: Ultra-high-definition television
Ultra-high-definition television (also known as Super Hi-Vision, Ultra HD television, UltraHD, UHDTV, or UHD) includes 4K UHD (2160p) and 8K UHD (4320p), which are two digital video formats proposed by NHK Science & Technology Research Laboratories and defined and approved by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). The Consumer Electronics Association announced on October 17, 2012, that "Ultra High Definition", or "Ultra HD", would be used for displays that have an aspect ratio of at least 16:9 and at least one digital input capable of carrying and presenting natural video at a minimum resolution of 3840×2160 pixels.[193][194]

Market share
North American consumers purchase a new television set on average every seven years, and the average household owns 2.8 televisions. As of 2011[update], 48 million are sold each year at an average price of $460 and size of 38 in (97 cm).[195]




Worldwide LCD TV manufacturers market share, 2018


Manufacturer

Statista[196]


Samsung Electronics
16.6%


TCL
11.6%


LG Electronics
11.3%


Hisense
7%


Skyworth
6%


Sony
4.8%


Sharp
3.7%


Others
39%

Content
Programming
See also: Television show, Video production, and Television studio
Getting TV programming shown to the public can happen in many other ways. After production, the next step is to market and deliver the product to whichever markets are open to using it. This typically happens on two levels:

Original run or First run: a producer creates a program of one or multiple episodes and shows it on a station or network which has either paid for the production itself or to which a license has been granted by the television producers to do the same.
Broadcast syndication: this is the terminology rather broadly used to describe secondary programming usages (beyond original run). It includes secondary runs in the country of first issue, but also international usage which may not be managed by the originating producer. In many cases, other companies, television stations, or individuals are engaged to do the syndication work, in other words, to sell the product into the markets they are allowed to sell into by contract from the copyright holders, in most cases the producers.
First-run programming is increasing on subscription services outside of the United States, but few domestically produced programs are syndicated on domestic free-to-air (FTA) elsewhere. This practice is increasing, however, generally on digital-only FTA channels or with subscriber-only, first-run material appearing on FTA. Unlike United States, repeat FTA screenings of an FTA network program usually only occur on that network. Also, affiliates rarely buy or produce non-network programming that is not focused on local programming.

Genres
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (December 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate.  (December 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Television genres include a broad range of programming types that entertain, inform, and educate viewers. The most expensive entertainment genres to produce are usually dramas and dramatic miniseries. However, other genres, such as historical Western genres, may also have high production costs.
Pop culture entertainment genres include action-oriented shows such as police, crime, detective dramas, horror, or thriller shows. As well, there are also other variants of the drama genre, such as medical dramas and daytime soap operas. Sci-fi series can fall into either the drama or action category, depending on whether they emphasize philosophical questions or high adventure. Comedy is a popular genre which includes situation comedy (sitcom) and animated series for the adult demographic such as Comedy Central's South Park.
The least expensive forms of entertainment programming genres are game shows, talk shows, variety shows, and reality television. Game shows feature contestants answering questions and solving puzzles to win prizes. Talk shows contain interviews with film, television, music and sports celebrities and public figures. Variety shows feature a range of musical performers and other entertainers, such as comedians and magicians, introduced by a host or Master of Ceremonies. There is some crossover between some talk shows and variety shows because leading talk shows often feature performances by bands, singers, comedians, and other performers in between the interview segments. Reality television series "regular" people (i.e., not actors) facing unusual challenges or experiences ranging from arrest by police officers (COPS) to significant weight loss (The Biggest Loser). A derived version of reality shows depicts celebrities doing mundane activities such as going about their everyday life (The Osbournes, Snoop Dogg's Father Hood) or doing regular jobs (The Simple Life).
Fictional television programs that some television scholars and broadcasting advocacy groups argue are "quality television", include series such as Twin Peaks and The Sopranos. Kristin Thompson argues that some of these television series exhibit traits also found in art films, such as psychological realism, narrative complexity, and ambiguous plotlines. Nonfiction television programs that some television scholars and broadcasting advocacy groups argue are "quality television", include a range of serious, noncommercial, programming aimed at a niche audience, such as documentaries and public affairs shows.

Funding
  Television sets per 1000 people of the world    .mw-parser-output .legend{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .legend-color{display:inline-block;min-width:1.25em;height:1.25em;line-height:1.25;margin:1px 0;text-align:center;border:1px solid black;background-color:transparent;color:black}.mw-parser-output .legend-text{}  1000+   100–200     500–1000   50–100     300–500   0–50     200–300   No data 
Around the world, broadcast television is financed by government, advertising, licensing (a form of tax), subscription, or any combination of these. To protect revenues, subscription television channels are usually encrypted to ensure that only subscribers receive the decryption codes to see the signal. Unencrypted channels are known as free to air or FTA. In 2009, the global TV market represented 1,217.2 million TV households with at least one TV and total revenues of 268.9 billion EUR (declining 1.2% compared to 2008).[197] North America had the biggest TV revenue market share with 39% followed by Europe (31%), Asia-Pacific (21%), Latin America (8%), and Africa and the Middle East (2%).[198] Globally, the different TV revenue sources divide into 45–50% TV advertising revenues, 40–45% subscription fees and 10% public funding.[199][200]

Advertising
Main article: Television advertisement
Television's broad reach makes it a powerful and attractive medium for advertisers. Many television networks and stations sell blocks of broadcast time to advertisers ("sponsors") to fund their programming.[201] Television advertisements (variously called a television commercial, commercial or ad in American English, and known in British English as an advert) is a span of television programming produced and paid for by an organization, which conveys a message, typically to market a product or service. Advertising revenue provides a significant portion of the funding for most privately owned television networks. The vast majority of television advertisements today consist of brief advertising spots, ranging in length from a few seconds to several minutes (as well as program-length infomercials). Advertisements of this sort have been used to promote a wide variety of goods, services and ideas since the beginning of television.

  Television was still in its experimental phase in 1928, but the medium's potential to sell goods was already predicted.
The effects of television advertising upon the viewing public (and the effects of mass media in general) have been the subject of discourse by philosophers including Marshall McLuhan. The viewership of television programming, as measured by companies such as Nielsen Media Research, is often used as a metric for television advertisement placement, and consequently, for the rates charged to advertisers to air within a given network, television program, or time of day (called a "daypart"). In many countries, including the United States, television campaign advertisements are considered indispensable for a political campaign. In other countries, such as France, political advertising on television is heavily restricted,[202] while some countries, such as Norway, completely ban political advertisements.
The first official, paid television advertisement was broadcast in the United States on July 1, 1941, over New York station WNBT (now WNBC) before a baseball game between the Brooklyn Dodgers and Philadelphia Phillies. The announcement for Bulova watches, for which the company paid anywhere from $4.00 to $9.00 (reports vary), displayed a WNBT test pattern modified to look like a clock with the hands showing the time. The Bulova logo, with the phrase "Bulova Watch Time", was shown in the lower right-hand quadrant of the test pattern while the second hand swept around the dial for one minute.[203][204] The first TV ad broadcast in the U.K. was on ITV on 22 September 1955, advertising Gibbs SR toothpaste. The first TV ad broadcast in Asia was on Nippon Television in Tokyo on 28 August 1953, advertising Seikosha (now Seiko), which also displayed a clock with the current time.[205]

United States
Since inception in the US in 1941,[206] television commercials have become one of the most effective, persuasive, and popular methods of selling products of many sorts, especially consumer goods. During the 1940s and into the 1950s, programs were hosted by single advertisers. This, in turn, gave great creative license to the advertisers over the content of the show. Perhaps due to the quiz show scandals in the 1950s,[207] networks shifted to the magazine concept, introducing advertising breaks with other advertisers.
U.S. advertising rates are determined primarily by Nielsen ratings. The time of the day and popularity of the channel determine how much a TV commercial can cost. For example, it can cost approximately $750,000 for a 30-second block of commercial time during the highly popular singing competition American Idol, while the same amount of time for the Super Bowl can cost several million dollars. Conversely, lesser-viewed time slots, such as early mornings and weekday afternoons, are often sold in bulk to producers of infomercials at far lower rates. In recent years, the paid program or infomercial has become common, usually in lengths of 30 minutes or one hour. Some drug companies and other businesses have even created "news" items for broadcast, known in the industry as video news releases, paying program directors to use them.[208]
Some television programs also deliberately place products into their shows as advertisements, a practice started in feature films[209] and known as product placement. For example, a character could be drinking a certain kind of soda, going to a particular chain restaurant, or driving a certain make of car. (This is sometimes very subtle, with shows having vehicles provided by manufacturers for low cost in exchange as a product placement). Sometimes, a specific brand or trade mark, or music from a certain artist or group, is used. (This excludes guest appearances by artists who perform on the show.)

United Kingdom
The TV regulator oversees TV advertising in the United Kingdom. Its restrictions have applied since the early days of commercially funded TV. Despite this, an early TV mogul, Roy Thomson, likened the broadcasting licence as being a "licence to print money".[210] Restrictions mean that the big three national commercial TV channels: ITV, Channel 4, and Channel 5 can show an average of only seven minutes of advertising per hour (eight minutes in the peak period). Other broadcasters must average no more than nine minutes (twelve in the peak). This means that many imported TV shows from the U.S. have unnatural pauses where the British company does not utilize the narrative breaks intended for more frequent U.S. advertising. Advertisements must not be inserted in the course of certain specific proscribed types of programs which last less than half an hour in scheduled duration; this list includes any news or current affairs programs, documentaries, and programs for children; additionally, advertisements may not be carried in a program designed and broadcast for reception in schools or in any religious broadcasting service or other devotional program or during a formal Royal ceremony or occasion. There also must be clear demarcations in time between the programs and the advertisements. The BBC, being strictly non-commercial, is not allowed to show advertisements on television in the U.K., although it has many advertising-funded channels abroad. The majority of its budget comes from television license fees (see below) and broadcast syndication, the sale of content to other broadcasters.

Ireland
Broadcast advertising is regulated by the Broadcasting Authority of Ireland.[211]

Subscription
Some TV channels are partly funded from subscriptions; therefore, the signals are encrypted during broadcast to ensure that only the paying subscribers have access to the decryption codes to watch pay television or specialty channels. Most subscription services are also funded by advertising.

Taxation or license
Television services in some countries may be funded by a television licence or a form of taxation, which means that advertising plays a lesser role or no role at all. For example, some channels may carry no advertising at all and some very little, including:

Australia (ABC Television)
Belgium (RTBF)
Denmark (DR)
Ireland (RTÉ)
Japan (NHK)
Norway (NRK)
Sweden (SVT)
Switzerland (SRG SSR)
Republic of China (Taiwan) (PTS)
United Kingdom (BBC Television)
United States (PBS)
The British Broadcasting Corporation's TV service carries no television advertising on its UK channels and is funded by an annual television licence paid by the occupiers of premises receiving live telecasts. As of 2012[update] it was estimated that approximately 26.8 million UK private domestic households owned televisions, with approximately 25 million TV licences in all premises in force as of 2010.[212] This television license fee is set by the government, but the BBC is not answerable to or controlled by the government.[citation needed] As of 2009[update] two main BBC TV channels were watched by almost 90% of the population each week and overall had 27% share of total viewing,[213] despite the fact that 85% of homes were multi-channel, with 42% of these having access to 200 free-to-air channels via satellite and another 43% having access to 30 or more channels via Freeview.[214] As of June 2021[update] the licence that funds the advertising-free BBC TV channels cost £159 for a colour TV Licence and £53.50 for a black and white TV Licence (free or reduced for some groups).[215]
The Australian Broadcasting Corporation's television services in Australia carry no advertising by external sources; it is banned under the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1983, which also ensures its the editorial independence. The ABC receives most of its funding from the Australian Government (some revenue is received from its Commercial division), but it has suffered progressive funding cuts under Liberal governments since the 1996 Howard government,[216] with particularly deep cuts in 2014 under the Turnbull government,[217] and an ongoing indexation freeze as of 2021[update].[218][219] The funds provide for the ABC's television, radio, online, and international outputs, although ABC Australia, which broadcasts throughout the Asia-Pacific region, receives additional funds through DFAT and some advertising on the channel.[220][221]
In France, government-funded channels carry advertisements, yet those who own television sets have to pay an annual tax ("la redevance audiovisuelle").[222]
In Japan, NHK is paid for by license fees (known in Japanese as reception fee (受信料, Jushinryō)). The broadcast law that governs NHK's funding stipulates that any television equipped to receive NHK is required to pay. The fee is standardized, with discounts for office workers and students who commute, as well a general discount for residents of Okinawa prefecture.

Broadcast programming
Main article: Broadcast programming
See also: TV listings (UK)
Broadcast programming, or TV listings in the United Kingdom, is the practice of organizing television programs in a schedule, with broadcast automation used to regularly change the scheduling of TV programs to build an audience for a new show, retain that audience, or compete with other broadcasters' programs.

Social aspects
Main articles: Social aspects of television and Television consumption
  American family watching television, circa 1958
Television has played a pivotal role in the socialization of the 20th and 21st centuries. There are many aspects of television that can be addressed, including negative issues such as media violence. Current research is discovering that individuals suffering from social isolation can employ television to create what is termed a parasocial or faux relationship with characters from their favorite television shows and movies as a way of deflecting feelings of loneliness and social deprivation.[223] Several studies have found that educational television has many advantages. The article "The Good Things about Television"[224] argues that television can be a very powerful and effective learning tool for children if used wisely. With respect to faith, many Christian denominations use television for religious broadcasting.

Opposition
Methodist denominations in the conservative holiness movement, such as the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection and the Evangelical Wesleyan Church, eschew the use of the television.[225] Some Baptists, such as those affiliated with Pensacola Christian College,[226] also eschew television. Many Traditional Catholic congregations such as the Society of Saint Pius X (SSPX), as with Laestadian Lutherans, oppose the presence of television in the household, teaching that it is an occasion of sin.[227][228][229]

Negative impacts
Children, especially those aged 5 or younger, are at risk of injury from falling televisions.[230] A CRT-style television that falls on a child will, because of its weight, hit with the equivalent force of falling multiple stories from a building.[231] Newer flat-screen televisions are "top-heavy and have narrow bases", which means that a small child can easily pull one over.[232] As of 2015[update], TV tip-overs were responsible for more than 10,000 injuries per year to children in the U.S., at a cost of more than $8 million per year in emergency care.[230][232]
A 2017 study in The Journal of Human Resources found that exposure to cable television reduced cognitive ability and high school graduation rates for boys. This effect was stronger for boys from more educated families. The article suggests a mechanism where light television entertainment crowds out more cognitively stimulating activities.[233]
With high lead content in CRTs and the rapid diffusion of new flat-panel display technologies, some of which (LCDs) use lamps which contain mercury, there is growing concern about electronic waste from discarded televisions. Related occupational health concerns exist, as well, for disassemblers removing copper wiring and other materials from CRTs. Further environmental concerns related to television design and use relate to the devices' increasing electrical energy requirements.[234]

See also
.mw-parser-output .portalbox{float:right;border:solid #aaa 1px;padding:0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tleft{margin:0.5em 1em 0.5em 0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tright{margin:0.5em 0 0.5em 1em}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul{display:table;box-sizing:border-box;padding:0.1em;max-width:175px;background:#f9f9f9;font-size:85%;line-height:110%;font-style:italic;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li{display:table-row}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:first-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em;vertical-align:middle;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:last-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em 0.2em 0.2em 0.3em;vertical-align:middle}

Television portal
.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
B-television
Broadcast-safe
Content discovery platform
Information-action ratio
List of countries by number of television broadcast stations
List of television manufacturers
List of years in television
Lists of television channels
Media psychology
MicroLED
Sign language on television
Telephilia
Television studies
TV accessory

References
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ Diggs-Brown, Barbara (2011) Strategic Public Relations: Audience Focused Practice p.48

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"TVTechnology: The State of Television, Worldwide". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ a b Julie Jacobson (1 December 2012). "Mitsubishi Drops DLP Displays: Goodbye RPTVs Forever". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ a b Marshall Honorof (28 October 2014). "LG's Exit May Herald End of Plasma TVs". Tom's Guide. Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ a b c "LG Electronics expects the OLED TV market to gradually replace the LED TV market". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ a b "All of Sony's new Smart TVs run on Android TV". The Verge. 5 January 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ a b "CES 2015: New Samsung Smart TVs Will Be Powered by Tizen OS". Tech Times. 3 January 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ a b "LG to show off webOS 2.0 smart TV at CES 2015". CNET. Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ a b "Internet TV and The Death of Cable TV, really". Techcrunch.com. 24 October 2010. Retrieved 17 January 2012.

^ a b c d e "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. 30 December 1969. Retrieved 30 April 2016.

^ Thompson, Robert (3 October 2015). "1985: Television Transformed 1.0". The New York Times.

^ a b Johnson, Richard (2018). “Big movie stars are not making the cut on the small screen”, p. 6, The New York Post, 11 October 2018. Retrieved 24 November 2018.

^ Shiers, George and May (1997), Early Television: A Bibliographic Guide to 1940. Taylor & Francis, pp. 13, 22. ISBN 978-0-8240-7782-2.

^ Shiers & Shiers, p. 13, 22.

^ Constantin PERSKYI (20 September 1907). "Télévision au moyen de l'électricité". The New York Times Sunday Magazine. Congrès Inographs by Telegraph. p. 7.

^ "Sending Photographs by Telegraph", The New York Times, Sunday Magazine, 20 September 1907, p. 7.

^ Henry de Varigny, "La vision à distance Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine", L'Illustration, Paris, 11 December 1909, p. 451.

^ R. W. Burns, Television: An International History of the Formative Years, IET, 1998, p. 119. ISBN 0-85296-914-7.

^ Wilfred S. Ogden (December 1921). "How the World's First Wireless News-Picture Was Flashed Across the Atlantic Ocean, Paris get President Harding's portrait in twenty minutes". Popular Science. The Popular Science Monthly. Bonnier Corporation. pp. 21–22. ISSN 0161-7370. Retrieved 2 July 2014.

^ "Current Topics and Events". Nature. 115 (2892): 504–508. 1925. Bibcode:1925Natur.115..504.. doi:10.1038/115504a0.

^ "John Logie Baird (1888 - 1946)". BBC. Retrieved 7 April 2021.

^ J. L. Baird, "Television in 1932", BBC Annual Report, 1933.

^ "Radio Shows Far Away Objects in Motion", The New York Times, 14 June 1925, p. 1.

^ a b Glinsky, Albert (2000). Theremin: Ether Music and Espionage. Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press. pp. 41–45. ISBN 978-0-252-02582-2.

^ "Case Files: Francis Jenkins (Phantoscope)". The Franklin Institute. 27 May 2016. Retrieved 28 March 2020.

^ Abramson, Albert, The History of Television, 1880 to 1941, McFarland & Co., Inc., 1987, p. 101. ISBN 978-0-89950-284-7.

^ Brewster, Richard. "Early Electronic Television RCA TV Development: 1929–1949". Early Television Museum. Retrieved 20 February 2016.

^ a b Kenjiro Takayanagi: The Father of Japanese Television Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine, NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corporation), 2002. Retrieved 23 May 2009.

^ Donald F. McLean, Restoring Baird's Image (London: IEEE, 2000), p. 184.

^ "VE9AK entry at". Earlytelevision.org. Retrieved 2 March 2010.

^ "Peck Television Corporation Console Receiver and Camera". Early Television Museum. Retrieved 18 February 2012.

^ Ferdinand Braun (1897) "Ueber ein Verfahren zur Demonstration und zum Studium des zeitlichen Verlaufs variabler Ströme" (On a process for the display and study of the course in time of variable currents), Annalen der Physik und Chemie, 3rd series, 60 : 552–59.

^ Marcus, Laurence. "Television Timeline 1812–1923 – Television Heaven".

^ a b "History of the Cathode Ray Tube". About.com. Retrieved 4 October 2009.

^ 
Campbell-Swinton, A. A. (18 June 1908). "Distant Electric Vision (first paragraph)". Nature. 78 (2016): 151. Bibcode:1908Natur..78..151S. doi:10.1038/078151a0. S2CID 3956737.

^ 
Campbell-Swinton, A. A. (18 June 1908). "Distant Electric Vision" (PDF). Nature. 78 (2016): 151. Bibcode:1908Natur..78..151S. doi:10.1038/078151a0. S2CID 3956737.

^ "Distant Electric Vision", The Times (London), 15 November 1911, p. 24b.

^ 
Bairdtelevision. "Alan Archivald Campbell-Swinton (1863–1930)". Biography. Retrieved 10 May 2010.

^ Shiers, George and May (1997), Early television: a bibliographic guide to 1940. New York: Garland, p. 56. Retrieved 13 June 2010.

^ 
Campbell-Swinton, A. A. (23 October 1926). "Electric Television (abstract)". Nature. 118 (2973): 590. Bibcode:1926Natur.118..590S. doi:10.1038/118590a0. S2CID 4081053.

^ Burns, R W. (1998). Television: An International History of the Formative Years. The Institute of Electrical Engineers (IEE) (History of Technology Series 22) in association with [ The Science Museum (UK)]. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-85296-914-4.

^ 
News (2 April 1914). "Prof. G.M. Minchin, F.R.S". Nature. 93 (2318): 115–16. Bibcode:1914Natur..93..115R. doi:10.1038/093115a0.

^ 
Miller, H. & Strange. J. W. (2 May 1938). "The electrical reproduction of images by the photoconductive effect". Proceedings of the Physical Society. 50 (3): 374–84. Bibcode:1938PPS....50..374M. doi:10.1088/0959-5309/50/3/307.

^ 
Iams, H. & Rose, A. (August 1937). "Television Pickup Tubes with Cathode-Ray Beam Scanning". Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers. 25 (8): 1048–70. doi:10.1109/JRPROC.1937.228423. S2CID 51668505.

^ Abramson, Albert, Zworykin, Pioneer of Television, p. 16.

^ "Hungary – Kálmán Tihanyi's 1926 Patent Application 'Radioskop'". Memory of the World. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Retrieved 22 February 2008.

^ United States Patent Office, Patent No. 2,133,123, 11 October 1938.

^ United States Patent Office, Patent No. 2,158,259, 16 May 1939

^ "Vladimir Kosma Zworykin, 1889–1982". Bairdtelevision.com. Retrieved 17 April 2009.

^ a b [1] "Kálmán Tihanyi (1897–1947)", IEC Techline, International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), 15 July 2009.

^ a b "Kálmán Tihanyi's 1926 Patent Application 'Radioskop'", Memory of the World, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 2005. Retrieved 29 January 2009.

^ Tihanyi, Koloman, Improvements in television apparatus. European Patent Office, Patent No. GB313456. Convention date UK application: 1928-06-11, declared void and published: 11 November 1930. Retrieved 25 April 2013.

^ "Patent US2133123 – Television apparatus". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ "Patent US2158259 – Television apparatus". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ "Milestones:Development of Electronic Television, 1924–1941". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ Hart, Hugh (28 January 2010). "Jan. 29, 1901: DuMont Will Make TV Work." Wired. Retrieved 21 May 2021.

^ Postman, Neil, "Philo Farnsworth", The TIME 100: Scientists & Thinkers, Time, 29 March 1999. Retrieved 28 July 2009.

^ a b "Philo Taylor Farnsworth (1906–1971)" Archived 22 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine, The Virtual Museum of the City of San Francisco. Retrieved 15 July 2009.

^ Abramson, Albert, Zworykin, Pioneer of Television, p. 226.

^ The Philo T. and Elma G. Farnsworth Papers

^ Abramson, Albert, Zworykin, Pioneer of Television, University of Illinois Press, 1995, p. 51. ISBN 0-252-02104-5.

^ Zworykin, Vladimir K., Television System. Patent No. 1691324, U.S. Patent Office. Filed 1925-07-13, issued 13 November 1928. Retrieved 28 July 2009

^ Zworykin, Vladimir K., Television System. Patent No. 2022450, U.S. Patent Office. Filed 1923-12-29, issued 26 November 1935. Retrieved 10 May 2010.

^ Stashower, Daniel, The Boy Genius and the Mogul: The Untold Story of Television, Broadway Books, 2002, pp. 243–44. ISBN 978-0-7679-0759-0.

^ Everson, George (1949), The Story of Television, The Life of Philo T. Farnsworth New York: W.W. Norton & Co,. ISBN 978-0-405-06042-7, 266 pp.

^ 
 Lawrence, Williams L. (27 June 1933). Human-like eye made by engineers to televise images. 'Iconoscope' converts scenes into electrical energy for radio transmission. Fast as a movie camera. Three million tiny photocells 'memorize', then pass out pictures. Step to home television. Developed in ten years' work by Dr. V.K. Zworykin, who describes it at Chicago. The New York Times. ISBN 978-0-8240-7782-2. Retrieved 10 January 2010.

^ Abramson, Albert (1987), The History of Television, 1880 to 1941. Jefferson, NC: Albert Abramson. p. 148. ISBN 0-89950-284-9.

^ Everson, George (1949), The Story of Television, The Life of Philo T. Farnsworth New York: W.W. Norton & Co,. ISBN 978-0-405-06042-7, pp. 137–41.

^ Everson, George (1949), The Story of Television, The Life of Philo T. Farnsworth New York: W.W. Norton & Co,. ISBN 978-0-405-06042-7, p. 139.

^ Everson, George (1949), The Story of Television, The Life of Philo T. Farnsworth New York: W.W. Norton & Co,. ISBN 978-0-405-06042-7, p. 141.

^ Albert Abramson, Zworykin: Pioneer of Television, University of Illinois Press, 1995, p. 111.

^ "New Television System Uses 'Magnetic Lens'", Popular Mechanics, Dec. 1934, pp. 838–39.

^ Burns, R.W. Television: An international history of the formative years. (1998). IEE History of Technology Series, 22. London: IEE, p. 370. ISBN 9780852969144.

^ "Patent US2296019 – Chromoscopic adapter for television equipment". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ 
EMI LTD; Tedham, William F. & McGee, James D. "Improvements in or relating to cathode ray tubes and the like". Patent No. GB 406,353 (filed May 1932, patented 1934). United Kingdom Intellectual Property Office. Retrieved 22 February 2010.

^ 
Tedham, William F. & McGee, James D. "Cathode Ray Tube". Patent No. 2,077,422 (filed in Great Britain 1932, filed in USA 1933, patented 1937). United States Patent Office. Retrieved 10 January 2010.

^ Burns, R.W., Television: An international history of the formative years. (1998). IEE History of Technology Series, 22. London: IEE, p. 576. ISBN 0-85296-914-7.

^ Winston, Brian (1986). Misunderstanding media. Harvard University Press. pp. 60–61. ISBN 978-0-674-57663-6. Retrieved 9 March 2010.

^ Winston, Brian (1998). Media technology and society. A history: from the telegraph to the Internet. Routledge. p. 105. ISBN 978-0-415-14230-4. Retrieved 9 March 2010.

^ a b 
Alexander, Robert Charles (2000). The inventor of stereo: the life and works of Alan Dower Blumlein. Focal Press. pp. 217–19. ISBN 978-0-240-51628-8. Retrieved 10 January 2010.

^ 
Burns, R.W. (2000). The life and times of A.D. Blumlein. IET. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-85296-773-7. Retrieved 5 March 2010.

^ 
Lubszynski, Hans Gerhard & Rodda, Sydney. "Improvements in or relating to television". Patent No. GB 442,666 (filed May 1934, patented 1936). United Kingdom Intellectual Property Office. Retrieved 15 January 2010.

^ 
Blumlein, Alan Dower & McGee, James Dwyer. "Improvements in or relating to television transmitting systems". Patent No. GB 446,661 (filed August 1934, patented 1936). United Kingdom Intellectual Property Office. Retrieved 9 March 2010.

^ 
McGee, James Dwyer. "Improvements in or relating to television transmitting systems". Patent No. GB 446,664 (filed September 1934, patented 1936). United Kingdom Intellectual Property Office. Retrieved 9 March 2010.

^ 
Alexander, Robert Charles (2000). The inventor of stereo: the life and works of Alan Dower Blumlein. Focal Press. p. 216. ISBN 978-0-240-51628-8. Retrieved 10 January 2010.

^ Inglis, Andrew F. (1990). Behind the tube: a history of broadcasting technology and business. Focal Press. p. 172. ISBN 978-0-240-80043-1. Retrieved 15 January 2010.

^ 
Dieckmann, Max & Rudolf Hell. "Lichtelektrische Bildzerlegerröehre für Fernseher". Patent No. DE 450,187 (filed 1925, patented 1927). Deutsches Reich Reichspatentamt. Retrieved 28 July 2009.

^ 
Farnsworth, Philo T. "Television System". Patent No. 1,773,980 (filed 1927, patented 1930). United States Patent Office. Retrieved 28 July 2009.

^ de Vries, M.J.; de Vries, Marc; Cross, Nigel & Grant, Donald P. (1993). Design methodology and relationships with science, Número 71 de NATO ASI series. Springer. p. 222. ISBN 978-0-7923-2191-0. Retrieved 15 January 2010.

^ a b 
Smith, Harry (July 1953). "Multicon – A new TV camera tube". newspaper article. Early Television Foundation and Museum. Archived from the original on 18 March 2010. Retrieved 15 January 2010.

^ 
Gittel, Joachim (11 October 2008). "Spezialröhren". photographic album. Jogis Röhrenbude. Retrieved 15 January 2010.

^ 
Early Television Museum. "TV Camera Tubes, German "Super Iconoscope" (1936)". photographic album. Early Television Foundation and Museum. Archived from the original on 17 June 2011. Retrieved 15 January 2010.

^ 
Gittel, Joachim (11 October 2008). "FAR-Röhren der Firma Heimann". photographic album. Jogis Röhrenbude. Retrieved 15 January 2010.

^ 
Philips (1958). "5854, Image Iconoscope, Philips" (PDF). electronic tube handbook. Philips. Retrieved 15 January 2010.

^ Everson, George (1949), The Story of Television, The Life of Philo T. Farnsworth New York: W.W. Norton & Co,. ISBN 978-0-405-06042-7, p. 248.

^ a b Abramson, Albert (1987), The History of Television, 1880 to 1941. Jefferson, NC: Albert Abramson. p. 254. ISBN 0-89950-284-9.

^ Schatzkin, Paul (2002), The Boy Who Invented Television. Silver Spring, Maryland: Teamcom Books, pp. 187–88. ISBN 1-928791-30-1.

^ "Go-Ahead Signal Due for Television", The New York Times, 25 April 1941, p. 7.

^ "An Auspicious Beginning", The New York Times, 3 August 1941, p. X10.

^ "Benjamin Adler, 86, An Early Advocate of UHF Television". The New York Times. 18 April 1990.

^ "ePoly Briefs Home".

^ "On the beginning of broadcast in 625 lines 60 years ago", 625 magazine (in Russian). Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ "M.I. Krivocheev – an engineer's engineer", EBU Technical Review, Spring 1993.

^ "In the Vanguard of Television Broadcasting".

^ [2] Archived 7 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine

^ [3] Archived 14 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine

^ Childs, William R.; Martin, Scott B.; Stitt-Gohdes, Wanda (2004). Business and Industry: Savings and investment options to telecommuting. Marshall Cavendish. p. 1217. ISBN 9780761474395. In 1952 Ibuka toured AT&T's Bell Laboratories in the United States and saw the newly invented transistor. He realized that replacing the large, clumsy vacuum tube with the transistor would make possible smaller, more portable radios and TVs.

^ "Sony Founder Masaru Ibuka's New Year's Dream Comes True: The Launch of Sony's TV Business". Time Capsule. Sony. 21. 17 November 2009. Retrieved 1 October 2019.

^ Sparke, Penny (2009). Japanese Design. The Museum of Modern Art. p. 18. ISBN 9780870707391.

^ Lucie-Smith, Edward (1983). A History of Industrial Design. Phaidon Press. p. 208. ISBN 9780714822815. The first all-transistor television set was introduced by Sony in 1959 (fig. 386), only four years after their all-transistor radio, and started the transformation of television from something used for communal viewing, as the radio in the 30s had been a focus for communal listening, into an object of solitary contemplation.

^ Chang, Yoon Seok; Makatsoris, Harris C.; Richards, Howard D. (2007). Evolution of Supply Chain Management: Symbiosis of Adaptive Value Networks and ICT. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 9780306486968.

^ M. Le Blanc, "Etude sur la transmission électrique des impressions lumineuses", La Lumière Electrique, vol. 11, 1 December 1880, pp. 477–81.

^ R.W. Burns, Television: An International History of the Formative Years, IET, 1998, p. 98. ISBN 0-85296-914-7.

^ Western technology and Soviet economic development: 1945 to 1965, by Antony C. Sutton, Business & Economics – 1973, p. 330

^ The History of Television, 1880–1941, by Albert Abramson, 1987, p. 27

^ A. Rokhlin, Tak rozhdalos' dal'novidenie (in Russian) Archived 24 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine

^ John Logie Baird, Television Apparatus and the Like, U.S. patent, filed in U.K. in 1928.

^ Baird Television: Crystal Palace Television Studios. Previous color television demonstrations in the U.K. and U.S. had been via closed circuit.

^ "The World's First High Definition Colour Television System". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ Peter C. Goldmark, assignor to Columbia Broadcasting System, "Color Television", U.S. Patent 2,480,571, filed 7 September 1940.

^ Current Broadcasting 1940

^ a b "Color Television Success in Test", The New York Times, 30 August 1940, p. 21.

^ "Color Television Achieves Realism", The New York Times, 5 September 1940, p. 18.

^ "New Television System Transmits Images in Full Color", Popular Science, December 1940, p. 120.

^ "CBS Demonstrates Full Color Television," The Wall Street Journal, 5 September 1940, p. 1. "Television Hearing Set," The New York Times, 13 November 1940, p. 26.

^ Ed Reitan, RCA-NBC Color Firsts in Television (commented).

^ "Making of Radios and Phonographs to End April 22," The New York Times, 8 March 1942, p. 1. "Radio Production Curbs Cover All Combinations," The Wall Street Journal, 3 June 1942, p. 4. "WPB Cancels 210 Controls; Radios, Trucks in Full Output," New York Times, 21 August 1945, p. 1.

^ Bob Cooper, "Television: The Technology That Changed Our Lives", Early Television Foundation.

^ Albert Abramson, The History of Television, 1942 to 2000, McFarland & Company, 2003, pp. 13–14. ISBN 0-7864-1220-8

^ Baird Television: The World's First High Definition Colour Television System.

^ National Television System Committee (1951–1953), [Report and Reports of Panel No. 11, 11-A, 12–19, with Some supplementary references cited in the Reports, and the Petition for adoption of transmission standards for color television before the Federal Communications Commission, n.p., 1953], 17 v. illus., diagrams., tables. 28 cm. LC Control No.:54021386 Library of Congress Online Catalog

^ "GE Portacolor". Early Television Museum. Retrieved 2 October 2019.

^ Tyson, Kirk (1996). Competition in the 21st Century. CRC Press. p. 253. ISBN 9781574440324.

^ "1960 - Metal Oxide Semiconductor (MOS) Transistor Demonstrated". The Silicon Engine. Computer History Museum. Retrieved 29 July 2019.

^ Atalla, M.; Kahng, D. (1960). "Silicon-silicon dioxide field induced surface devices". IRE-AIEE Solid State Device Research Conference.

^ Harrison, Linden T. (2005). Current Sources and Voltage References: A Design Reference for Electronics Engineers. Elsevier. p. 185. ISBN 978-0-08-045555-6.

^ Austin, W. M.; Dean, J. A.; Griswold, D. M.; Hart, O. P. (November 1966). "TV Applications of MOS Transistors". IEEE Transactions on Broadcast and Television Receivers. 12 (4): 68–76. doi:10.1109/TBTR1.1966.4320029.

^ Amos, S. W.; James, Mike (2013). Principles of Transistor Circuits: Introduction to the Design of Amplifiers, Receivers and Digital Circuits. Elsevier. p. 332. ISBN 9781483293905.

^ "HDTV Set Top Boxes and Digital TV Broadcast Information". Archived from the original on 22 May 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2014.

^ Kruger, Lennard G.; Guerrero, Peter F. (2002). Digital Television: An Overview. Hauppauge, New York: Nova Publishers. p. 1. ISBN 9781590335024.

^ "The Origins and Future Prospects of Digital Television". 22 December 2008. Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ a b c d e Lea, William (1994). Video on demand: Research Paper 94/68. 9 May 1994: House of Commons Library. Retrieved 20 September 2019.CS1 maint: location (link)

^ a b c d e Barbero, M.; Hofmann, H.; Wells, N. D. (14 November 1991). "DCT source coding and current implementations for HDTV". EBU Technical Review. European Broadcasting Union (251): 22–33. Retrieved 4 November 2019.

^ Ahmed, Nasir (January 1991). "How I Came Up With the Discrete Cosine Transform". Digital Signal Processing. 1 (1): 4–5. doi:10.1016/1051-2004(91)90086-Z.

^ Ghanbari, Mohammed (2003). Standard Codecs: Image Compression to Advanced Video Coding. Institution of Engineering and Technology. pp. 1–2. ISBN 9780852967102.

^ Li, Jian Ping (2006). Proceedings of the International Computer Conference 2006 on Wavelet Active Media Technology and Information Processing: Chongqing, China, 29-31 August 2006. World Scientific. p. 847. ISBN 9789812709998.

^ a b "Information about interlaced and progressive scan signals". Archived from the original on 16 August 2009. Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ "What's the Difference between "Interlaced" and "Progressive" Video? – ISF Forum".

^ "The history and politics of DTV" (PDF). p. 13.

^ Steve Kovach (8 December 2010). "What Is A Smart TV?". Business Insider. Retrieved 17 January 2012.

^ Carmi Levy Special to the Star (15 October 2010). "Future of television is online and on-demand". Toronto Star. Retrieved 17 January 2012.

^ Jeremy Toeman 41 (20 October 2010). "Why Connected TVs Will Be About the Content, Not the Apps". Mashable.com. Retrieved 17 January 2012.

^ "espacenet – Original document". Worldwide.espacenet.com. Retrieved 17 January 2012.

^ "espacenet – Bibliographic data". Worldwide.espacenet.com. Retrieved 17 January 2012.

^ Kats, Rimma (15 November 2018). "How Many Households Own a Smart TV?" eMarketer. Retrieved 21 May 2021.

^ "How Stereoscopic Television is Shown". Baird Television website. Archived from the original on 19 October 2010. Retrieved 18 September 2010.

^ "3D TV-sales growth". globalpost.com. 18 March 2013. Archived from the original on 24 July 2013.

^ "Future looks flat for 3D TV". The Sydney Morning Herald. 15 August 2013.

^ Chris Welch (12 June 2013). "Is 3D TV dead? ESPN 3D to shut down by end of 2013". The Verge.

^ Guy Walters (25 September 2014). "Why 3D TV is such a turn-off". Iol Scitech.

^ Donovan Jackson (29 September 2014). "Is 3D dead…again?". Techday.

^ Hannah Furness (17 September 2014). "3D TV falls further out of favour as Sky omits Premier League matches from schedule". The Telegraph.

^ "The First Television Show" Popular Mechanics, August 1930, pp. 177–79

^ Laurence Marcus. "The History of the BBC: The First TV Era". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ "CEA Study Says Seven Percent of TV Households Use Antennas", '"TVTechnology, 30 July 2013 Archived 17 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Nielsen: Broadcast Reliance Grew in 2012", TVTechnology, 14 January 2013 Archived 18 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine

^ "History of Cable". California Cable and Telecommunications Association. Retrieved 20 February 2016.

^ Antipolis, Sophia (September 1997). Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Implementation of Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) modulation in DVB satellite transmission systems (PDF) (Report). European Telecommunications Standards Institute. pp. 1–7. TR 101 198. Retrieved 20 July 2014.

^ "Frequency letter bands". Microwaves101.com. 25 April 2008.

^ "Installing Consumer-Owned Antennas and Satellite Dishes". FCC. Retrieved 21 November 2008.

^ Campbell, Dennis; Cotter, Susan (1998). Copyright Infringement. Kluwer Law International. ISBN 978-90-247-3002-5. Retrieved 18 September 2014.

^ "The Arthur C. Clarke Foundation". Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 1 June 2016.

^ Campbell, Richard; Martin, Christopher R.; Fabos, Bettina (23 February 2011). Media and Culture: An Introduction to Mass Communication. London, UK: Macmillan Publishers. p. 152. ISBN 978-1-4576-2831-3. Retrieved 15 August 2014.

^ "The 1945 Proposal by Arthur C. Clarke for Geostationary Satellite Communications". Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ Wireless technologies and the national information infrastructure. DIANE Publishing. September 1995. p. 138. ISBN 978-0-16-048180-2. Retrieved 15 August 2014.

^ a b Klein, Christopher (23 July 2012). "The Birth of Satellite TV, 50 Years Ago". History.com. History Channel. Retrieved 5 June 2014.

^ "Relay 1". NASA.gov. NASA.

^ Darcey, RJ (16 August 2013). "Syncom 2". NASA.gov. NASA. Retrieved 5 June 2014.

^ "Encyclopedia Astronautica – Intelsat I". Archived from the original on 16 January 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010.

^ "Soviet-bloc Research in Geophysics, Astronomy, and Space" (Press release). Springfield Virginia: U.S. Joint Publications Research Service. 1970. p. 60. Retrieved 16 December 2014.

^ Robertson, Lloyd (9 November 1972). "Anik A1 launching: bridging the gap". CBC English TV. Retrieved 25 January 2007.

^ Ezell, Linda N. (22 January 2010). "NASA – ATS". Nasa.gov. NASA. Retrieved 1 July 2014.

^ Long Distance Television Reception (TV-DX) For the Enthusiast, Roger W. Bunney, ISBN 0-900162-71-6

^ "Ekran". Astronautix.com. Astronautix. 2007. Archived from the original on 12 November 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2014.

^ "Ekran".

^ a b "The Source for Critical Information and Insight". IHS Technology.

^ a b "RIP, rear-projection TV". CNET. Retrieved 22 March 2015.

^ Taylor, Charles (2000). The Kingfisher Science Encyclopedia. Kingfisher. p. 370. ISBN 978-0-7534-5269-1.

^ a b "How Computer Monitors Work". 16 June 2000. Retrieved 4 October 2009.

^ "How Digital Light Processing Works". THRE3D.com. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 3 February 2014.

^ "Hardware Report: Shipments of LCD TVs Surpass CRT TVs". DailyTech LLC. Retrieved 20 February 2016.

^ "Digital Television". 28 February 2013.

^ "What is Ultra HDTV?", Ultra HDTV Magazine, retrieved 27 October 2013

^ "The Ultimate Guide to 4K Ultra HD", Ultra HDTV Magazine, retrieved 27 October 2013

^ Martin, Andrew (27 December 2011). "Plummeting TV Prices Squeeze Makers and Sellers". The New York Times. p. B1. Retrieved 27 December 2011.

^ "Global LCD TV manufacturer market share from 2008 to 2018". Statista. Retrieved 26 February 2017.

^ Global TV 2010 – Markets, Trends Facts & Figures (2008–2013) International Television Expert Group

^ Global TV Revenues (2008–09) International Television Expert Group

^ iDate's Global TV Revenue Market Shares International Television Expert Group

^ OFCOM's Global TV Market Report 2009 International Television Expert Group

^ Karen Hornick Archived 17 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine "That Was the Year That Was" American Heritage, Oct. 2006.

^ Fritz Plasser, Global Political Campaigning, p226

^ "Imagery For Profit" R.W. Stewart, The New York Times, 6 July 1941.

^ "WNBT/Bulova test pattern".

^ コマーシャルメッセージ (Commercial message). Retrieved 24 November 2013[circular reference]

^ "1940–1949 C.E. : Media History Project : U of M". Mediahistory.umn.edu. 18 May 2012. Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2012.

^ "The American Experience | People & Events | The Aftermath of the Quiz Show Scandal". Pbs.org. Retrieved 2 November 2012.

^ Jon Stewart of "The Daily Show" was mock-outraged at this, saying, "That's what we do!", and calling it a new form of television, "infoganda".

^ Segrave, Kerry (1994). Product Placement in Hollywood Films. ISBN 978-0-7864-1904-3.

^ "Kenneth Roy Thomson". Press Gazette. 7 July 2006. Archived from the original on 16 June 2011. Retrieved 24 April 2010.

^ General Commercial Communications Code and Children’s Commercial Communications Code, referenced in: "BAI launches Revised Broadcasting Codes". Broadcasting Authority of Ireland. May 2010. Retrieved 1 May 2016.;

^ "TV Licensing-FOI: Licences facts and figures". tvlicensing.co.uk. Retrieved 10 December 2012.

^ "viewing statistics in UK". Barb.co.uk. Archived from the original on 5 October 2008. Retrieved 17 April 2009.

^ "The Communications Market: Digital Progress Report – Digital TV, Q3 2007" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 June 2008. Retrieved 18 June 2010.

^ "TV Licence types and costs". TV Licensing. Archived from the original on 2 May 2021. Retrieved 15 June 2021.

^ Muller, Denis (13 February 2019). "Australian governments have a long history of trying to manipulate the ABC – and it's unlikely to stop now". The Conversation. Retrieved 15 June 2021.

^ Yussuf, Ahmed (19 November 2014). "Turnbull confirms $254 million cut from ABC funding". ABC News. Retrieved 15 June 2021.

^ Duke, Jennifer (16 August 2020). "Was the ABC's funding cut?". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 15 June 2021.

^ Wake, Alexandra; Ward, Michael (24 June 2020). "Latest $84 million cuts rip the heart out of the ABC, and our democracy". The Conversation. Retrieved 15 June 2021.

^ Spigelman, James (8 December 2014). "ABC Services in the Asia-Pacific". About the ABC. Retrieved 15 June 2021.

^ O’Keeffe, Annmaree; Greene, Chris (10 December 2019). "International Public Broadcasting: A Missed Opportunity For Projecting Australia's Soft Power". Lowy Institute. Retrieved 15 June 2021.

^ Ministry of Finance Archived 1 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine

^ Butler, Fionnuala, Cynthia Pickett. "Imaginary Friends." Scientific American. 28 July 2009. Web. 26 March 2010. http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=imaginary-friends

^ "The Good Things About Television". Archived from the original on 3 February 2006.

^ Marty, Martin E. (1980). Where the Spirit Leads: American Denominations Today. John Knox Press. p. 88. ISBN 978-0-8042-0868-0.

^ "Technology Handbook". Pensacola Christian College. Retrieved 2 May 2021.

^ "Television: An Occasion of Sin?". Society of Saint Pius X. Retrieved 5 May 2021.

^ Lamport, Mark A. (31 August 2017). Encyclopedia of Martin Luther and the Reformation. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 409. ISBN 978-1-4422-7159-3.

^ David Anderson (7 July 2007). "The Kingdom of God, the Fellowship of the Saints". Laestadian Lutheran Church. Retrieved 16 September 2021.

^ a b Ferguson, RW; Mickalide, AD (December 2012), A Report to the Nation on Home Safety: The Dangers of TV Tip-Overs (PDF), Washington, D.C.: Safe Kids Worldwide

^ Bernard, PA; Johnston, C; Curtis, SE; King, WD (September 1998). "Toppled television sets cause significant pediatric morbidity and mortality". Pediatrics. 102 (3): E32. doi:10.1542/peds.102.3.e32. PMID 9724680.

^ a b Home Safety Fact Sheet (2015) (PDF), SafeKids Worldwide, February 2015

^ Hernæs, Øystein; Markussen, Simen; Røed, Knut (2019). "Television, Cognitive Ability, and High School Completion". Journal of Human Resources. 54 (2): 371–400. doi:10.3368/jhr.54.2.0316.7819R1. hdl:10419/130339. S2CID 4846339.

^ "The Rise of the Machines: A Review of Energy Using Products in the Home from the 1970s to Today" (PDF). Energy Saving Trust. 3 July 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2007.


Further reading
Abramson, Albert (2003). The History of Television, 1942 to 2000. Jefferson, NC, and London: McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-1220-4.
Pierre Bourdieu, On Television, The New Press, 2001.
Tim Brooks and Earle March, The Complete Guide to Prime Time Network and Cable TV Shows, 8th ed., Ballantine, 2002.
Jacques Derrida and Bernard Stiegler, Echographies of Television, Polity Press, 2002.
David E. Fisher and Marshall J. Fisher, Tube: the Invention of Television, Counterpoint, Washington, D.C., 1996, ISBN 1-887178-17-1.
Steven Johnson, Everything Bad is Good for You: How Today's Popular Culture Is Actually Making Us Smarter, New York, Riverhead (Penguin), 2005, 2006, ISBN 1-59448-194-6.
Leggett, Julian (April 1941). "Television in Color". Popular Mechanics. Chicago. Retrieved 7 December 2014.
Jerry Mander, Four Arguments for the Elimination of Television, Perennial, 1978.
Jerry Mander, In the Absence of the Sacred, Sierra Club Books, 1992, ISBN 0-87156-509-9.
Neil Postman, Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business, New York, Penguin US, 1985, ISBN 0-670-80454-1.
Evan I. Schwartz, The Last Lone Inventor: A Tale of Genius, Deceit, and the Birth of Television, New York, Harper Paperbacks, 2003, ISBN 0-06-093559-6.
Beretta E. Smith-Shomade, Shaded Lives: African-American Women and Television, Rutgers University Press, 2002.
Alan Taylor, We, the Media: Pedagogic Intrusions into US Mainstream Film and Television News Broadcasting Rhetoric, Peter Lang, 2005, ISBN 3-631-51852-8.
Amanda D. Lotz, The Television Will Be Revolutionized, New York University Press, ISBN 978-0-8147-5220-3
External links
.mw-parser-output .sister-box{border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0;background:#f9f9f9}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>div{padding:0.75em 0;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>div>b{display:block}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>ul{border-top:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.75em 0;width:217px;margin:0 auto}.mw-parser-output .sister-box>ul>li{min-height:31px}.mw-parser-output .sister-logo{display:inline-block;width:31px;line-height:31px;vertical-align:middle;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .sister-link{display:inline-block;margin-left:4px;width:182px;vertical-align:middle}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:flex;justify-content:center;align-items:baseline;font-size:88%;background-color:#fdfdfd;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;clear:both;margin:1em 0 0;padding:0 2em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{margin:0 1em 0 0.5em;padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 0 auto;min-height:24px;line-height:22px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;flex:0 1 auto;align-items:baseline;padding:0.2em 0;column-gap:1em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-logo{width:22px;line-height:22px;margin:0 0.2em;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-link{margin:0 0.2em;text-align:left}@media screen and (max-width:960px){.mw-parser-output .sister-bar{display:flex;flex-flow:column wrap;font-size:88%;background-color:#fdfdfd;clear:both;margin:1em auto 0;padding:0 2em}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-header{padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 1}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;flex:1;align-items:baseline;padding:0.2em 0;border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;flex:0 0 20em;min-width:20em;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px}}.mw-parser-output .navbox+link+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox+style+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+link+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+style+.sister-bar{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .sister-bar+.navbox-styles+.portal-bar{margin-top:-1px}Televisionat Wikipedia's sister projectsDefinitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from Wikiversity
.mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:22em;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em;background:#f8f9fa;border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.2em;text-align:center;line-height:1.4em;font-size:88%;border-collapse:collapse;display:table}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .sidebar{display:table!important;float:right!important;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em!important}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-subgroup{width:100%;margin:0;border-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-left{float:left;clear:left;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-none{float:none;clear:both;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-outer-title{padding:0 0.4em 0.2em;font-size:125%;line-height:1.2em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-image{padding:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-caption,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle-with-top-image,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-caption{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle{padding:0.4em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.2em 0.8em;font-size:145%;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-image{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-heading{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content{padding:0 0.5em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content-with-subgroup{padding:0.1em 0.4em 0.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-below{padding:0.3em 0.8em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-below{border-top:1px solid #aaa;border-bottom:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-navbar{text-align:right;font-size:115%;padding:0 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:left;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.6em;font-size:105%}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title-c{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:center;margin:0 3.3em}@media(max-width:720px){body.mediawiki .mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:100%!important;clear:both;float:none!important;margin-left:0!important;margin-right:0!important}}Library resources about  Television 
Resources in your library

Television at Curlie
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox th,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output th.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteList of television programs broadcast by regionAsia-wide
Animal Planet
Animax
Armenia TV
AXN
BBC
Discovery
Discovery HD World
Discovery Science
HBO
MTV Southeast Asia
National Geographic
Nat Geo Wild
Nickelodeon
Syfy Asia
STAR World
Star Vijay
STAR Movies/Fox Movies Premium
Channel V
East AsiaHong Kong
TVB
ViuTVsix
Cable TV/ HK Open TV/ HKIBC
Star Vijay
Japan
Animax
MBS
TBS
Tokyo MX
TV Tokyo
South Korea
Arirang TV
Cartoon Network
Disney Channel
KBS
MBC TV
MBC
SBS
JTBC
South AsiaIndia
&TV
9X
Animal Planet
Zee Magic
Cartoon Network
Colors
Colors Tamil
DD National
Discovery
Discovery HD World
Discovery Kids
Disney Channel
Gemini TV
Hungama TV
Imagine TV
Jaya TV
Kalaignar TV
Life OK
Nat Geo
Nat Geo Wild
Nickelodeon
Pogo
Puthuyugam TV
Raj TV
SAB TV
Sahara One
Sony TV
Star Jalsha
STAR Maa
STAR One
STAR Plus
Star Vijay
Sun TV
TV Asia
Zee TV
Zee Tamizh
Zindagi
Nepal
Nepal TV
Kantipur Television
AP1
ABC Television (Nepal)
Image
Kantipur Gold
Himalaya
Janta
NTV PLUS
NTV Kohalpur
NTV News
Sagarmatha
Pakistan
ARY Digital
ARY Zindagi
Geo Kahani
Geo TV
Hum TV
Hum Sitaray
Nickelodeon
PTV
Spacetoon
TV One
Urdu 1
Sri Lanka
Shakthi TV
Southeast AsiaMalaysia
TV2
TV3
ntv7
8TV
TV9
Astro Ceria
Star Vijay
Philippines
A2Z
ABS-CBN
ABS-CBN Sports+Action
ANC
Animal Planet
Animax
Asianovela Channel
BEAM TV
Boomerang
CNN Philippines
Discovery
DZBB
DZMM
DZRH/DZRH News TV
ETC
Fox Movies
Fox Filipino
GMA Network
GTV
IBC
INC TV
Jack TV
Jeepney TV
Kapamilya Channel
Kapamilya Online Live
Knowledge Channel
Light TV
Metro Channel
Nat Geo
Nat Geo Wild
Net 25
One Sports
PTV
Radyo5/One PH
RJTV
SMNI
TV5
Yey!
UNTV
Singapore
Asian Food Network
BBC
CNA
Channel 5
Channel 8
Channel U
Vasantham
Star Vijay
Vietnam
Animal Planet
AXN
Discovery
HanoiTV1
HanoiTV2
HTV1
HTV2
HTV3
HTV4
HTV7
HTV9
MTV Vietnam
Nat Geo
Nat Geo Wild
RED by HBO
Fox Movies
VTV1
VTV2
VTV3
VTV4
VTV5
VTV6
VTV7
VTV8
VTV9
OceaniaAustralia
ABC
Animal Planet
Cartoon Network
Channel 31
Discovery
Discovery HD World
Disney Channel
MTV Australia
Nat Geo
Nat Geo Wild
Network Ten
Nine Network
Sky News Live
SBS
SF Channel
Seven Network
New Zealand
Discovery
Prime
TVNZ
EuropeAlbania
Top Channel
Armenia
Armenia TV
Armenia 1
Cyprus
CyBC
METV
France
6ter
Canal+
France 2
France 3
France 4
France 5
Gulli
M6
Disney Channel
TF1
TMC
TFX
TF1 Séries Films
W9
Germany
Das Erste
Kabel eins
ProSieben
RTL
VOX
ZDF
ZDFneo
Greece
Alpha TV
Alter Channel
ANT1
ERT
Mega Channel
Hungary
Cool TV
Duna TV
Film+
 M1 (TV channel)
RTL Klub
TV2
Viasat 3
Ireland
RTÉ
TG4
Virgin Media
Italy
Fox
FX
Joi
Mya
Steel
Norway
NRK 1
NRK 2
NRK 3
NRK super
TV 2
TV 2 Bliss
TV 2 Zebra
TV 2 Livsstil
 TV2 Sport
TV 2 Nyhetskanalen
TVNorge
Vox
FEM
Max
TV3 Norway
Poland
Polsat
TVN
TVN Siedem
TV Puls
Portugal
Disney Channel
Nickelodeon
SIC
TVI
Spain
La 1
La 2
Antena 3 (Spain)
Clan (TV channel)
Nickelodeon
TVE
Telecinco
La Sexta
UK
Animal Planet
BBC
Cartoonito
CBBC
CBeebies
Boomerang
Bravo
Cartoon Network
Challenge
Channel 4
Channel 5
Channel One
CITV
Comedy Central
Discovery
Discovery Home & Health
Disney Channel
Disney XD
E4
ITV
ITV2
Nat Geo
Nat Geo Wild
Nickelodeon
Nicktoons
Sky One
Sky Witness
Syfy
Middle EastIsrael
Channel 2
Channel 1
Israeli Educational Television
Arutz HaYeladim
North AmericaCanada
ABC Spark
Animal Planet
BBC Canada
BiteTV
bpm:tv
CBC
Citytv
CMT
Comedy Gold
The Comedy Network
Cooking Channel
Cosmopolitan TV
CTV/CTV Two
Discovery
Discovery Science
Disney Channel
DejaView
DTour
E! (TV system)
E! (specialty channel)
Family
Food Network
FX
G4
Global
Global Reality
HGTV
History Television
Joytv
Knowledge Network
MTV
MTV2
MuchMore
MuchMusic
Nat Geo
Nat Geo Wild
Nickelodeon
OLN
OUTtv
The Pet Network
Prise 2
Radio-Canada
Showcase
Teletoon
theScore
TSN
TVA
TVOntario
V
Yes TV
YTV
Caribbean
Caribbean Broadcasting Corporation
CaribVision
Cubavision International
Tempo TV
Mexico
Televisa
TV Azteca
United States
ABC
Adult Swim
A&E
Amazon Prime Video
AMC
Animal Planet
Antenna TV
Apple TV+
Audience
Azteca
BBC America
BET
BET+
BET Her
Boomerang
Bravo
Cartoon Network
CBS
Chiller
Cinemax
CMT
CNBC
CNN
Comedy Central
Cooking Channel
Crackle
Create
Curiosity Stream
The CW
The CW Plus
DC Universe
Destination America
Discovery Channel
Discovery Family
Disney Channel
Disney+
Disney Junior
Disney XD
DuMont
E!
Epix
Esquire Network
ESPN
Facebook Watch
Food Network
Fox
Fox Business
Fox Kids
Fox News
Fox Sports 1
Freeform
Fuse
FX
FXX
G4
GAC Family
GetTV
Game Show Network
HBO
HBO Max
Hallmark Channel
H&I
History
Hulu
IFC
IMDb TV
Investigation Discovery
Ion
Justice Network
Kids' WB
Lifetime
Logo
MeTV
MSNBC
MTV
MTV2
MTV Classic
MundoMax
MyNetworkTV
Nat Geo
Nat Geo Wild
NBC
NBCSN
Netflix
NewsNation
NFL Network
Nickelodeon
Nick at Nite
Nick GaS
Nick Jr.
Nicktoons
Noggin
NTA Film Net
OWN
Oxygen
Paramount Network
Paramount+
PBS
PBS Kids
Peacock
Playhouse Disney
Pop
Qubo
Quibi
Retro TV
RT America
Science
Seeso
Showtime
Shudder
Smile
Spike
Starz
Sundance TV
Syfy
Syndication
TBD
TBS
TechTV
TeenNick
Telemundo
TheCoolTV
The WB
The WB 100+
This TV
TLC
TNT
Toon Disney
Toonami
Tr3s
Travel Channel
truTV
TV Land
TV One
UniMás
Universal Kids
Univision
Up
UPN
UPN Kids
USA Network
VH1
Vice TV
We TV
Yahoo! Screen
YouTube Premium
Latin America
Animal Planet
BBC
Canal Sony
Cartoon Network
Cartoonito
Discovery Kids
Discovery
Discovery Science
Star+
Disney Channel
Star Channel
Nat Geo
Nat Geo Wild
Nickelodeon
Nick Jr.
Warner Channel
South AmericaBrazil
Band
CNT
Disney Channel
Globo
GloboNews
Mix TV
MTV
Nickelodeon
Multishow
Record News
RecordTV
RedeTV!
SBT
Venezuela
RCTV
Televen
Venevisión
Multiple regions
Jetix
The Filipino Channel
GMA Pinoy TV
GMA Life TV
GMA News TV International
HBO Max
Xbox Live
Netflix
Amazon Prime Video
Paramount+
Disney+
Apple TV+
Star

vteHome appliancesTypes
Air conditioner
Air fryer
Air ioniser
Blower
Blender
Immersion blender
Clothes dryer
combo
Clothes iron
Coffeemaker
Dehumidifier
Dishwasher
drying cabinet
Domestic robot
comparison
Deep fryer
Electric blanket
Electric drill
Electric knife
Electric water boiler
Electric heater
Electric shaver
Electric toothbrush
Epilator
Evaporative cooler
Food processor
Kitchen hood
Garbage disposer
Fan
attic
ceiling
Fan heater
window
Freezer
Hair dryer
Hair iron
Mixer
Humidifier
Icemaker
Ice cream maker
Juicer
Laundry-folding machine
Lawn mower
Riding mower
Robotic lawn mower
Lighter
Oven
Convection oven
Microwave oven
Pie iron
Refrigerator
Crisper drawer
smart
Sewing machine
Slow cooker
Stove
Television set
Toaster
Vacuum cleaner
central
manual
robotic

Waffle iron
Water dispenser
Washing machine
See also
Appliance plug
Appliance recycling

vteBroadcastingMedium
Radio
Radio program
Cable
Digital
Satellite
Telephone
Mobile television
Teletext
Television
Television show
Analog
Cable
Digital
Digital terrestrial television
Satellite
Internet television and radio (Webcast
Streaming media
Web television
Peer-to-peer television
BitTorrent television and movies)
Broadcastingniche
Campus radio
Commercial broadcasting
Community radio
Multichannel television
Pay television
Pay-per-view
News broadcasting
Pirate radio / Pirate television
Public broadcasting
Religious broadcasting
Talk radio
Specialtychannels
Adult television channels
Children's interest channel / Children's television series
Documentary channel
Men's interest channel
Movie television channels
Music radio / Music television
Quiz channel
Shopping channel
News broadcasting
Business channels
Public affairs
Livestreamed news
Sports broadcasting
Women's interest channel
Productionand funding
Broadcast designer
Broadcast license
Broadcast network
Broadcast-safe
Broadcast television systems
Digital on-screen graphic
Director of network programming
Lower third
Network affiliate
News ticker
On-screen display
Outside broadcasting
Press box
Press pool
Score bug
Television news screen layout
Television licence
Television studio

vteBroadcast video formatsTelevisionAnalog525 lines
System M
NTSC
NTSC-J
PAL-M
625 lines
PAL
System B
System D
System G
System H
System I
System K
PAL-N
PALplus
SECAM
System B
System D
System G
System K
System L (SECAM-L)
Audio
BTSC (MTS)
EIAJ
NICAM
SAP
Sound-in-Syncs
Zweikanalton (A2/IGR)
Hidden signals
Captioning
CGMS-A
EPG
GCR
PDC
Teletext
VBI
VEIL
VIT
VITC
WSS
XDS
Historical
Pre-1940
Mechanical television
180-line
405-line
System A
441-line
819-line
MAC
MUSE
DigitalInterlaced
SDTV
480i
576i
HDTV
1080i
Progressive
LDTV
1seg
240p
288p
EDTV
480p
540p
576p
HDTV
720p
1080p
2K
UHDTV
4K
8K
MPEG-2 Video
ATSC
DVB
DVB 3D-TV
ISDB
DTMB
MPEG-4 AVC
ATSC A/72
DMB
DTMB
DVB
SBTVD
1seg
MPEG-H HEVC
ATSC 3.0
HD DMB
Audio
AC-3 (5.1)
AC-4
DTS
MPEG-1 Audio Layer II
MPEG Multichannel
PCM
LPCM
AAC
HE-AAC
MPEG-H 3D Audio
Hidden signals
AFD
Broadcast flag
Captioning
CPCM
EPG
Teletext
Technical issues
14:9 compromise
Broadcast-safe
Digital cinema (DCI)
Display motion blur
Moving image formats
MPEG transport stream
Reverse Standards Conversion
Standards conversion
Television transmitter
Test card
Video on demand
Video processing
Widescreen signaling
Templates (Analogue TV Topics)

vteTelecommunicationsHistory
Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Data compression
audio
DCT
image
video
Digital media
Internet video
online video platform
social media
streaming
Drums
Edholm's law
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Information Age
Information revolution
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Smartphone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepaid mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Semiconductor
device
MOSFET
transistor
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
digital
streaming
Undersea telegraph line
Videotelephony
Whistled language
Wireless revolution
Pioneers
Nasir Ahmed
Edwin Howard Armstrong
Mohamed M. Atalla
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
John Bardeen
Alexander Graham Bell
Emile Berliner
Tim Berners-Lee
Francis Blake (telephone)
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Charles Bourseul
Walter Houser Brattain
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Yogen Dalal
Donald Davies
Amos Dolbear
Thomas Edison
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Oliver Heaviside
Robert Hooke
Erna Schneider Hoover
Harold Hopkins
Gardiner Greene Hubbard
Internet pioneers
Bob Kahn
Dawon Kahng
Charles K. Kao
Narinder Singh Kapany
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Robert Metcalfe
Antonio Meucci
Samuel Morse
Jun-ichi Nishizawa
Charles Grafton Page
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Tivadar Puskás
Johann Philipp Reis
Claude Shannon
Almon Brown Strowger
Henry Sutton
Charles Sumner Tainter
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Thomas A. Watson
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin
Transmissionmedia
Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication
optical fiber
Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
wireless
Transmission line
data transmission circuit
telecommunication circuit
Network topologyand switching
Bandwidth
Links
Nodes
terminal
Network switching
circuit
packet
Telephone exchange
Multiplexing
Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division
Concepts
Communication protocol
Computer network
Data transmission
Store and forward
Telecommunications equipment
Types of network
Cellular network
Ethernet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Television
Telex
UUCP
WAN
Wireless network
Notable networks
ARPANET
BITNET
CYCLADES
FidoNet
Internet
Internet2
JANET
NPL network
Toasternet
Usenet
Locations
Africa
Americas
North
South
Antarctica
Asia
Europe
Oceania

 Telecommunication portal
 Category
 Outline
 Commons

vteMedia cultureMedia
Mass media
Mainstream media
24-hour news cycle
News broadcasting
News media
Ideology
Mainstream
Advanced capitalism
American Dream
Bipartisanship
Consumerism
Pensée unique
Pop music
DeceptionForms
Advertising
Propaganda
Fake news
Public relations
Spin
Tabloid journalism
Techniques
Cult of personality
Dumbing down
Framing
Media circus
Media event
Narcotizing dysfunction
Recuperation
Sensationalism
Others
Catch and kill
Crowd manipulation
Managing the news
Media manipulation
Philosophers
Theodor W. Adorno
Jean Baudrillard
Edward Bernays
Noam Chomsky
Guy Debord
Walter Lippmann
Marshall McLuhan
Jacques Rancière
Counterculture
Boycott
Call-out culture
Cancel culture
Civil disobedience
Culture jamming
Demonstration
Graffiti
Occupation
Political satire
Protest
Punk
Strike action
In academia
Influence of mass media
Media studies
Mediatization
Semiotic democracy
The Lonely Crowd
Issues
Anonymity
Concentration of media ownership
Freedom of speech
Media bias
Privacy
Synonyms
Advanced capitalism
Culture industry
Mass society
Post-Fordism
Society of the Spectacle

vteStandard test items
Pangram
Reference implementation
Sanity check
Standard test image
Artificial intelligence
Chinese room
Turing test
Television (test card)
SMPTE color bars
Indian-head test pattern
Test Card F
ETP-1
Philips PM5540
Philips PM5544
Philips PM5644
Telefunken FuBK
Computer languages
"Hello, World!" program
Quine
Trabb Pardo–Knuth algorithm
Man or boy test
Just another Perl hacker
Data compression
Calgary corpus
Canterbury corpus
3D computer graphics
Cornell box
Stanford bunny
Stanford dragon
Utah teapot
Machine learning
ImageNet
MNIST database
List
Typography
Hamburgevons
Lorem ipsum
The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog
Other
Acid3
"Bad Apple!!"
EICAR test file
GTUBE
Harvard sentences
Lenna
"The North Wind and the Sun"
"Tom's Diner"
SMPTE universal leader
EURion constellation
Shakedown
Webdriver Torso
1951 USAF resolution test chart

vteElectronicsBranches
Analog electronics
Digital electronics
Electronic instrumentation
Electronics engineering
Microelectronics
Optoelectronics
Power electronics
Printed electronics
Semiconductor
Schematic capture
Thermal management
Advanced topics
Atomtronics
Bioelectronics
Failure of electronic components
Flexible electronics
Low-power electronics
Molecular electronics
Nanoelectronics
Organic electronics
Photonics
Piezotronics
Quantum electronics
Spintronics
Electronic equipment
Air conditioner
Central heating
Clothes dryer
Computer/Notebook
Camera
Dishwasher
Freezer
Home robot
Home cinema
Home theater PC
Information technologies
Cooker
Microwave oven
Mobile phone
Networking hardware
Portable media player
Radio
Refrigerator
Robotic vacuum cleaner
Tablet
Telephone
Television
Water heater
Video game console
Washing machine
Applications
Audio electronics
Automotive electronics
Avionics
Control system
Data acquisition
e-book
e-health
Electronics industry
Electronic warfare
Embedded system
Home appliance
Home automation
Integrated circuit
Home appliance
Consumer electronics
Major appliance
Small appliance
Microwave technology
Military electronics
Multimedia
Nuclear electronics
Open hardware
Radar and Radionavigation
Radio electronics
Terahertz technology
Video hardware
Wired and Wireless Communications

.mw-parser-output .portal-bar{font-size:88%;font-weight:bold;display:flex;justify-content:center;align-items:baseline}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-bordered{padding:0 2em;background-color:#fdfdfd;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;clear:both;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-unbordered{padding:0 1.7em;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-header{margin:0 1em 0 0.5em;padding:0.2em 0;flex:0 0 auto;min-height:24px;line-height:22px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;align-items:baseline;flex:0 1 auto;padding:0.15em 0;column-gap:1em}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-item{display:flex;align-items:baseline;margin:0.15em 0;min-height:24px;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-logo{width:22px;line-height:22px;margin:0 0.2em;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-link{margin:0 0.2em;text-align:left}@media screen and (max-width:768px){.mw-parser-output .portal-bar{font-size:88%;font-weight:bold;display:flex;flex-flow:column wrap}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-header{text-align:center;flex:0;padding-left:0.5em;margin:0 auto}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar-content{display:flex;flex-flow:row wrap;align-items:baseline;flex:0;margin:0 auto;column-gap:1em;border-top:1px solid #a2a9b1}}.mw-parser-output .navbox+link+.portal-bar-bordered{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox+style+.portal-bar-bordered{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .portal-bar+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}Portals:PhysicsAssociation footballFormula OneNew York CityComedyConstructed languagesAnime and mangaAustraliaGermanyNorwayTelevisionRadioTheatreHistory of scienceAmerican footballBaseball
Authority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
National libraries
France (data)
United States
Other
Historical Dictionary of Switzerland
National Archives (US)






Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Television&oldid=1058713050"
		Categories: TelevisionAdvertising by mediumTelevision terminologyMedia formatsBroadcastingConsumer electronicsDigital technologyPerforming artsVideo hardware1925 in technology1927 in technologyTelecommunications-related introductions in 1925Telecommunications-related introductions in 1927American inventionsBritish inventionsGerman inventionsRussian inventionsTelevision industry1925 introductions1927 introductions20th-century inventionsHidden categories: CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertaintyWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: locationAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from September 2015Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely move-protected pagesUse dmy dates from December 2020Use American English from July 2020All Wikipedia articles written in American EnglishAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2015Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011Articles with unsourced statements from July 2009Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles needing additional references from March 2019All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2014All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2011Articles needing additional references from December 2014Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2014United States-centricArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2012Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2021Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2021Articles containing Japanese-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2015Pages using Sister project links with default searchArticles with Curlie linksArticles with GND identifiersArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with HDS identifiersArticles with NARA identifiers
	