
		From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
		  (Redirected from British Government)
		
		
		
		Jump to navigation
		Jump to search
		Central government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}"Her Majesty's Government" redirects here. For other governments referred to as Her Majesty's Government, and the use of the term, see Her Majesty's Government (term).
This article is about the way the UK is governed. For the people in the current British administration, see British Government frontbench.
 


.mw-parser-output .infobox-subbox{padding:0;border:none;margin:-3px;width:auto;min-width:100%;font-size:100%;clear:none;float:none;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .infobox-3cols-child{margin:auto}Her Majesty's GovernmentWelsh: Llywodraeth y Deyrnas UnedigIrish: Rialtas na Ríochta AontaitheScots: Govrenment o the Unitit KinrickOverviewEstablished1707 (1707)StateUnited KingdomLeaderPrime Minister
(Boris Johnson)Appointed byThe Monarch of the United Kingdom (Elizabeth II)Main organCabinet of the United KingdomMinistries25 ministerial departments, 20 non-ministerial departmentsResponsible toParliament of the United KingdomAnnual budgetGB£882 billionHeadquarters10 Downing Street, LondonWebsitewww.gov.uk 
.mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:22em;float:right;clear:right;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em;background:#f8f9fa;border:1px solid #aaa;padding:0.2em;text-align:center;line-height:1.4em;font-size:88%;border-collapse:collapse;display:table}body.skin-minerva .mw-parser-output .sidebar{display:table!important;float:right!important;margin:0.5em 0 1em 1em!important}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-subgroup{width:100%;margin:0;border-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-left{float:left;clear:left;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-none{float:none;clear:both;margin:0.5em 1em 1em 0}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-outer-title{padding:0 0.4em 0.2em;font-size:125%;line-height:1.2em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-image{padding:0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-top-caption,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle-with-top-image,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-caption{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-pretitle{padding:0.4em 0.4em 0;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.2em 0.8em;font-size:145%;line-height:1.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-title-with-pretitle{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-image{padding:0.2em 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-heading{padding:0.1em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content{padding:0 0.5em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-content-with-subgroup{padding:0.1em 0.4em 0.2em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-below{padding:0.3em 0.8em;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-above,.mw-parser-output .sidebar-collapse .sidebar-below{border-top:1px solid #aaa;border-bottom:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-navbar{text-align:right;font-size:115%;padding:0 0.4em 0.4em}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:left;font-weight:bold;line-height:1.6em;font-size:105%}.mw-parser-output .sidebar-list-title-c{padding:0 0.4em;text-align:center;margin:0 3.3em}@media(max-width:720px){body.mediawiki .mw-parser-output .sidebar{width:100%!important;clear:both;float:none!important;margin-left:0!important;margin-right:0!important}}This article is part of a series onPolitics of the United Kingdom
Constitution
Parliamentary sovereignty
Rule of law
Separation of powers
Other constitutional principles

The Crown
The Monarch (list)
Elizabeth II


Heir apparent
Charles, Prince of Wales


Royal family
Succession
Prerogative
Counsellors of State

Executive
Privy Council

Elizabeth II(Queen-in-Council)


HM Government


Prime Minister (list)
Boris Johnson (C)

Deputy Prime Minister
Dominic Raab (C)


Cabinet (List)
Departments
Ministers
Agencies

Legislature
UK Parliament

Elizabeth II(Queen-in-Parliament)


House of Lords


Lord Speaker 
The Lord McFall of Alcluith


House of Commons


Speaker 
Sir Lindsay Hoyle

Leader of the Opposition
Sir Keir Starmer (L)


Act of Parliament
58th Parliament
Opposition
List of MPs

JudiciaryElizabeth II(Queen-on-the-Bench)


Supreme Court

President
The Lord Reed

Deputy President
The Lord Hodge

Justices of the Supreme Court

UK
England and Wales
Scotland
NI

Bank of England
Governor
Andrew Bailey

Deputy Governors
Monetary Policy Committee


Currencies
Banknotes
Coins

Elections & Referendums
UK Parliament constituencies (2023 Periodic Review of Westminster constituencies)
Political parties
Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000
Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011
Scottish Parliament constituencies and electoral regions
Senedd constituencies and electoral regions


UK general elections

1801 co-option1802180618071812181818201826183018311832–33183518371841184718521857185918651868187418801885188618921895190019061910 (Jan–Feb)1910 (Dec)1918192219231924192919311935194519501951195519591964196619701974 (Feb)1974 (Oct)19791983198719921997200120052010201520172019Next


European Parliament elections (1979–2019)

197919841989199419992004200920142019


Scottish Parliament elections

199920032007201120162021Next


Northern Ireland Assembly elections

1998200320072011201620172022


Senedd elections

199920032007201120162021Next


UK referendums

197520112016

Devolution
Joint Ministerial Committee
Legislative consent motions

 England
Governance of England
English votes for English laws
Greater London Authority
1998 referendum
Greater London Authority Act 1999(2007 Act)
Mayor of London
Sadiq Khan
Mayoral cabinet
London Assembly
London Plan
Combined authorities
Metro mayors
Cornwall Council

Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland Act 1998(2006 Act)
First Minister 
Paul Givan
deputy First Minister 
Michelle O'Neill
Executive
Assembly
Act of the Northern Ireland Assembly
Law of Northern Ireland

 Scotland
1997 referendum
Scotland Act 1998(2012 Act, 2016 Act)
First Minister
Nicola Sturgeon
Government
Scottish Parliament
Act of the Scottish Parliament
Scottish statutory instrument
Scots law

 Wales
1997 referendum(2011 referendum on law-making powers)
Government of Wales Act 1998(2006 Act, Wales Act 2014, Wales Act 2017)
First Minister
Mark Drakeford
Government
Senedd
Measure of the National Assembly for Wales (1999–2011)
Act of Senedd Cymru
Welsh law

Administration England
History
Subdivisions: Regions
Ceremonial counties (list)
Metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties
Metropolitan county
Non-metropolitan county
Greater London
Unitary authorities (list)
Districts (list)
Metropolitan Borough
Non-metropolitan District
London Borough
Civil parishes (list)
Historic counties

Northern Ireland
History
Subdivisions: Counties
Districts

 Scotland
History
Subdivisions: Sheriffdoms
Council areas
Community council areas
Civil parishes
Shires of Scotland

 Wales
History
Preserved counties
Principal areas
Communities (list)
Historic counties

Crown Dependencies
Bailiwick of Guernsey 
( Guernsey Alderney Sark)

 Bailiwick of Jersey

 Isle of Man

British Islands
Common Travel Area

Overseas Territories Akrotiri and Dhekelia Anguilla Bermuda British Antarctic Territory British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha ( Saint Helena Ascension Island Tristan da Cunha) South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands

British Overseas Territories citizen
Visa requirements
Visa policies

British Overseas Territories Act 2002
Chagos Archipelago sovereignty dispute
Gibraltar sovereignty dispute
Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute

Foreign relations
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
Foreign policy (history)

Diplomatic missions of / in the United Kingdom

UK passport
British National (Overseas) passport
Visa requirements
UK–CD Customs Union
Visa policy
Trade agreements

Australia
Belgium
Belize
Brunei
Canada
China
Hong Kong
Cyprus
Denmark
France
Germany
India
Israel
Italy
Japan
Kenya
Malaysia
Malta
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Spain
South Africa
Palestine
Pakistan
Portugal
United States

Ireland
Politics of Northern Ireland
Good Friday Agreement
UK–Ireland border
Northern Ireland Protocol
British–Irish Council

European Union (history)
Brexit
Post-Brexit United Kingdom relations with the European Union
UK–EU withdrawal agreement

The Commonwealth
member states

United Kingdom and the United Nations
United Nations Security Council
P5

NATO
G20
G7

 United Kingdom portalEnglandNorthern IrelandScotlandWales
Other countries
.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vte
The Government of the United Kingdom, domestically referred to as Her Majesty's Government,[note 1] is the central government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.[1][2] The government is led by the prime minister (currently Boris Johnson, since 24 July 2019[update]) who selects all the other ministers. The country has had a Conservative-led government since 2010, with successive prime ministers being the then leader of the Conservative Party. The prime minister and their most senior ministers belong to the supreme decision-making committee, known as the Cabinet.[2]

  British Parliament
Ministers of the Crown are responsible to the House in which they sit; they make statements in that House and take questions from members of that House. For most senior ministers this is usually the elected House of Commons rather than the House of Lords. The government is dependent on Parliament to make primary legislation,[3] and since the Fixed-terms Parliaments Act 2011, general elections are held every five years to elect a new House of Commons, unless there is a successful vote of no confidence in the government or a two-thirds vote for a snap election (as was the case in 2017 and 2019) in the House of Commons, in which case an election may be held sooner. After an election, the monarch (currently Queen Elizabeth II) selects as prime minister the leader of the party most likely to command the confidence of the House of Commons, usually by possessing a majority of MPs.[4]
Under the uncodified British constitution, executive authority lies with the monarch, although this authority is exercised only after receiving the advice of the Privy Council.[5] The Prime minister, the House of Lords, the Leader of the Opposition, and the police and military high command serve as members and advisers of the monarch on the Privy Council. In most cases the cabinet exercise power directly as leaders of the government departments, though some Cabinet positions are sinecures to a greater or lesser degree (for instance Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster or Lord Privy Seal).
The government is sometimes referred to by the metonym "Westminster" or "Whitehall", due to that being where many of its offices are situated. These metonyms are used especially by members of the Scottish Government, Welsh Government and Northern Ireland Executive in order to differentiate their government from HMG.

Contents

1 History
2 Her Majesty's Government and the Crown

2.1 Domestic powers
2.2 Foreign powers


3 Ministers and departments
4 Government in Parliament
5 Location
6 Limits of government power
7 Terminology
8 Devolved governments
9 Local government
10 See also
11 References
12 External links



History[edit]
The United Kingdom is a Constitutional Monarchy in which the reigning monarch (that is, the king or queen who is the head of state at any given time) does not make any open political decisions. All political decisions are taken by the government and Parliament. This constitutional state of affairs is the result of a long history of constraining and reducing the political power of the monarch, beginning with Magna Carta in 1215.
Since the start of Edward VII's reign in 1901, the prime minister has always been an elected Member of Parliament (MP) and thus directly answerable to the House of Commons. A similar convention applies to the chancellor of the exchequer. It would probably now be politically unacceptable for the budget speech to be given in the House of Lords, with members of Parliament unable to question the Chancellor directly, especially now that the Lords have very limited powers on money bills. The last chancellor of the exchequer to be a member of the House of Lords was Lord Denman, who served as interim chancellor of the exchequer for one month in 1834.[6]

Her Majesty's Government and the Crown[edit]
Main article: Royal Prerogative in the United Kingdom
The British monarch, currently Elizabeth II, is the head of state and the sovereign, but not the head of government. The monarch takes little direct part in governing the country and remains neutral in political affairs. However, the authority of the state that is vested in the sovereign, known as the Crown, remains as the source of executive power exercised by the government.
In addition to explicit statutory authority, the Crown also possesses a body of powers in certain matters collectively known as the royal prerogative. These powers range from the authority to issue or withdraw passports to declarations of war. By long-standing convention, most of these powers are delegated from the sovereign to various ministers or other officers of the Crown, who may use them without having to obtain the consent of Parliament.
The prime minister also has weekly meetings with the monarch, who "has a right and a duty to express her views on Government matters...These meetings, as with all communications between The Queen and her Government, remain strictly confidential. Having expressed her views, The Queen abides by the advice of her ministers."[7]
Royal prerogative powers include, but are not limited to, the following:

Domestic powers[edit]
The power to appoint (and in theory, dismiss) a prime minister. This power is exercised by the monarch personally. By convention they appoint (and are expected to appoint) the individual most likely to be capable of commanding the confidence of a majority in the House of Commons.
The power to appoint and dismiss other ministers. This power is exercised by the monarch on the advice of the prime minister.
The power to assent to and enact laws by giving royal assent to bills passed Parliament, which is required in order for a law to become effective (an act). This is exercised by the monarch, who also theoretically has the power to refuse assent, although no monarch has refused assent to a bill passed by Parliament since Queen Anne in 1708.
The power to give and to issue commissions to commissioned officers in the Armed Forces.
The power to command the Armed Forces. This power is exercised by the Defence Council in the Queen's name.
The power to appoint members to the Privy Council.
The power to issue, to suspend, cancel, recall, impound, withdraw or revoke British passports and the general power to provide or deny British passport facilities to British citizens and British nationals. This is exercised in the United Kingdom (but not necessarily in the Isle of Man, Channel Islands or British Overseas Territories) by the Home Secretary.
The power to pardon any conviction (the royal prerogative of mercy).
The power to grant, cancel and annul any honours.
The power to create corporations (including the status of being a city, with its own corporation) by royal charter, and to amend, replace and revoke existing charters.
Foreign powers[edit]
The power to make and ratify treaties.
The power to declare war and conclude peace with other nations.
The power to deploy the Armed Forces overseas.
The power to recognise states.
The power to credit and receive diplomats.
Even though the United Kingdom has no single constitutional document, the government published the above list in October 2003 to increase transparency, as some of the powers exercised in the name of the monarch are part of the royal prerogative.[8] However, the complete extent of the royal prerogative powers has never been fully set out, as many of them originated in ancient custom and the period of absolute monarchy, or were modified by later constitutional practice.

Ministers and departments[edit]
  Foreign Office, London
Main articles: List of government ministers of the United Kingdom and Departments of the Government of the United Kingdom
As of 2019, there are around 120 government ministers[9] supported by 560,000[10] civil servants and other staff working in the 25 ministerial departments[11] and their executive agencies. There are also an additional 20 non-ministerial departments with a range of further responsibilities.
In theory a government minister does not have to be a member of either House of Parliament. In practice, however, convention is that ministers must be members of either the House of Commons or House of Lords in order to be accountable to Parliament. From time to time, prime ministers appoint non-parliamentarians as ministers. In recent years such ministers have been appointed to the House of Lords.[12]

Government in Parliament[edit]
Under the British system, the government is required by convention and for practical reasons to maintain the confidence of the House of Commons. It requires the support of the House of Commons for the maintenance of supply (by voting through the government's budgets) and to pass primary legislation. By convention, if a government loses the confidence of the House of Commons it must either resign or a general election is held. The support of the Lords, while useful to the government in getting its legislation passed without delay, is not vital. A government is not required to resign even if it loses the confidence of the Lords and is defeated in key votes in that House. The House of Commons is thus the responsible house.
The prime minister is held to account during Prime Minister's Questions (PMQs) which provides an opportunity for MPs from all parties to question the PM on any subject. There are also departmental questions when ministers answer questions relating to their specific departmental brief. Unlike PMQs both the cabinet ministers for the department and junior ministers within the department may answer on behalf of the government, depending on the topic of the question.
During debates on legislation proposed by the government, ministers—usually with departmental responsibility for the bill—will lead the debate for the government and respond to points made by MPs or Lords.
Committees[13] of both the House of Commons and House of Lords hold the government to account, scrutinise its work and examine in detail proposals for legislation. Ministers appear before committees to give evidence and answer questions.
Government ministers are also required by convention and the Ministerial Code,[14] when Parliament is sitting, to make major statements regarding government policy or issues of national importance to Parliament. This allows MPs or Lords to question the government on the statement. When the government instead chooses to make announcements first outside Parliament, it is often the subject of significant criticism from MPs and the speaker of the House of Commons.[15]

Location[edit]
  The main entrance of 10 Downing Street, the official residence and office of the First Lord of the Treasury, who is by law nowadays also the Prime Minister (if they want to get paid).
The prime minister is based at 10 Downing Street in Westminster, London. Cabinet meetings also take place here. Most government departments have their headquarters nearby in Whitehall.

Limits of government power[edit]
See also: Act of Parliament (UK) and Powers of the prime minister of the United Kingdom
The government's powers include general executive and statutory powers, delegated legislation, and numerous powers of appointment and patronage. However, some powerful officials and bodies, (e.g. HM judges, local authorities, and the charity commissions) are legally more or less independent of the government, and government powers are legally limited to those retained by the Crown under common law or granted and limited by act of Parliament. Both substantive and procedural limitations are enforceable in the courts by judicial review.
Nevertheless, magistrates and mayors can still be arrested for and put on trial for corruption, and the government has powers to insert commissioners into a local authority to oversee its work, and to issue directives that must be obeyed by the local authority, if the local authority is not abiding by its statutory obligations.[16]
By contrast, as in European Union (EU) member states, EU officials cannot be prosecuted for any actions carried out in pursuit of their official duties, and foreign country diplomats (though not their employees) and foreign members of the European Parliament[17] are immune from prosecution in EU states under any circumstance. As a consequence, neither EU bodies nor diplomats have to pay taxes, since it would not be possible to prosecute them for tax evasion. When the UK was a member of the EU, this caused a dispute when the US ambassador to the UK claimed that London's congestion charge was a tax, and not a charge (despite the name), and therefore he did not have to pay it – a claim the Greater London Authority disputed.
Similarly, the monarch is totally immune from criminal prosecution and may only be sued with her permission (this is known as sovereign immunity). The monarch, by law, is not required to pay income tax, but Queen Elizabeth II has voluntarily paid it since 1993, and also pays local rates voluntarily. However, the monarchy also receives a substantial grant from the government, the Sovereign Support Grant, and Queen Elizabeth II's inheritance from her mother, Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, was exempt from inheritance tax.
In addition to legislative powers, HM Government has substantial influence over local authorities and other bodies set up by it, by financial powers and grants. Many functions carried out by local authorities, such as paying out housing benefit and council tax benefit, are funded or substantially part-funded by central government.
Neither the central government nor local authorities are permitted to sue anyone for defamation. Individual politicians are allowed to sue people for defamation in a personal capacity and without using government funds, but this is relatively rare (although George Galloway, who was a backbench MP for a quarter of a century, has sued or threatened to sue for defamation a number of times). However, it is a criminal offence to make a false statement about any election candidate during an election, with the purpose of reducing the number of votes they receive (as with libel, opinions do not count).

Terminology[edit]
While the government is the current group of ministers (the British Government frontbench), the government is also sometimes seen more broadly as including people or organisations that work for the ministers. The civil service, while 'independent of government',[18] is sometimes described as being part of the government,[19][20][21][22] due to the closeness of its working with ministers, in advising them, supporting them, and implementing their executive decisions. Some individuals who work for ministers even have the word 'Government' in their title, such as the Government Actuary and the Government Chief Scientific Adviser, as do civil service organisations such as the Government Statistical Service, the Government Legal Profession, and the Government Office for Science. Companies owned by the government can also be seen as parts of the government, such as UK Government Investments[23] and HS2 Ltd.[24]
Similarly, Parliamentary Private Secretaries are not ministers and so not part of the government.[25] However, they are bound by parts of the ministerial code, are part of the payroll vote, and can be seen as being on the 'first rung of the ministerial ladder'.[26][27] They are sometimes described as being part of the government.[28][29][30]

Devolved governments[edit]
Main article: Devolution in the United Kingdom
Since 1999, certain areas of central government have been devolved to accountable governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. These are not part of Her Majesty's Government, and are directly accountable to their own institutions, with their own authority under the Crown; in contrast, there is no devolved government in England.

Local government[edit]
  Refurbishment notice at Old Fire Station, Oxford, showing HM Government support.
Main articles: Local government in England, Local government in Scotland, Local government in Wales, and Local government in Northern Ireland
Up to three layers of elected local authorities (such as county, district and parish Councils) exist throughout all parts of the United Kingdom, in some places merged into unitary authorities. They have limited local tax-raising powers. Many other authorities and agencies also have statutory powers, generally subject to some central government supervision.

See also[edit]
.mw-parser-output .portalbox{float:right;border:solid #aaa 1px;padding:0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tleft{margin:0.5em 1em 0.5em 0}.mw-parser-output .portalbox.tright{margin:0.5em 0 0.5em 1em}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul{display:table;box-sizing:border-box;padding:0.1em;max-width:175px;background:#f9f9f9;font-size:85%;line-height:110%;font-style:italic;font-weight:bold}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li{display:table-row}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:first-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em;vertical-align:middle;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .portalbox>ul>li>span:last-child{display:table-cell;padding:0.2em 0.2em 0.2em 0.3em;vertical-align:middle}

Politics portal
United Kingdom portal
Departments of the United Kingdom Government
Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
Gov.uk
Government spending in the United Kingdom
British Government Frontbench
Her Majesty's Most Loyal Opposition
List of British governments
Northern Ireland Executive
Scottish Government
Welsh Government
Whole of Government Accounts
Office for Veterans' Affairs
References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ Her Majesty's Government Retrieved 28 June 2010

^ a b Overview of the UK system of government : Directgov – Government, citizens and rights. Archived direct.gov.uk webpage. Retrieved on 29 August 2014.

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"Legislation". UK Parliament. 2013. Retrieved 27 January 2013.

^ House of Commons – Justice Committee – Written Evidence. Publications.parliament.uk. Retrieved on 19 October 2010.

^ The monarchy : Directgov – Government, citizens and rights. Archived direct.gov.uk webpage. Retrieved on 29 August 2014.

^ The Parliament Acts – UK Parliament. Parliament.uk (21 April 2010). Retrieved on 12 October 2011.

^ "Queen and Prime Minister". The British Monarchy. 2013. Archived from the original on 14 April 2010. Retrieved 27 January 2013.

^ Mystery lifted on Queen's powers | Politics. The Guardian. Retrieved on 12 October 2011.

^ Maer, Lucinda; Kelly, Richard (31 March 2021). "Limitations on the number of Ministers" – via commonslibrary.parliament.uk. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Civil Service Statistics Archived 10 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine. civilservant.org.uk. September 2011

^ LIST OF MINISTERIAL RESPONSIBILITIES Including Executive Agencies and NonMinisterial Departments. Cabinet Office 2009

^ Maer, Lucinda (4 September 2017). "Ministers in the House of Lords". Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Committees – UK Parliament. Parliament.uk (21 April 2010). Retrieved on 12 October 2011.

^ Ministerial Code. Cabinet Office 2010

^ "Speakers' statements on ministerial policy announcements made outside the House" (PDF). Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 29 November 2010.CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link). Parliamentary Information List. Department of Information Services. www.parliament.uk. 16 July 2010

^ "Secretary of State sends in commissioners to Tower Hamlets". Gov.uk. 17 December 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2015.

^ "The Immunity of Members of the European Parliament" (PDF). European Union. October 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2015.

^ "Civil Service: About us". GOV.UK. Retrieved 26 October 2021. We’re politically impartial and independent of government

^ The Comptroller and Auditor General (5 June 2015). Central government staff costs (Report). National Audit Office. Retrieved 26 October 2021.

^ "civil service". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 29 October 2021. civil service, the body of government officials...

^ "UK government action to reduce the HGV driver shortage". GOV.UK. Retrieved 23 October 2021. The government... have sent nearly one million letters to thank HGV drivers

^ "HMG personnel security controls". GOV.UK. 1 April 2013. Retrieved 23 October 2021.

^ "What we do". UKGI.ORG.UK. Retrieved 27 October 2021. UKGI’s purpose is to be the government’s centre of excellence in corporate governance and corporate finance

^ "Government provides construction sector certainty by confirming 'Notice to proceed' on High Speed 2". GOV.UK. 15 April 2020. Retrieved 27 October 2021. HS2 Ltd today marks next step for the project, issuing ‘Notice to proceed’ on Britain’s new railway.

^ S Priddy (22 October 2021). Parliamentary Private Secretaries to Prime Ministers since 1906 (Report). House of Commons Library. Retrieved 11 December 2021. Parliamentary Private Secretaries (PPSs) are not members of the Government although they do have responsibilities and restrictions as defined by the Ministerial Code

^ "Back to the future: PPS role for mid Wales MP". BBC NEWS. 6 September 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2021. Montgomeryshire Tory MP Glyn Davies is about to put his foot on the first rung of the ministerial ladder, rejoining the government as a parliamentary private secretary.

^ "The female power base that helped Theresa May win her day". Financial Times. 18 September 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2021. A handful of other alumni who won their seats in 2015, including Victoria Atkins, Lucy Frazer and Victoria Prentis have just set foot on the first rung of the ministerial ladder, being appointed this week as parliamentary private secretaries.

^ "Tory MP Caroline Ansell resigns from government over free school meals rebellion". SKY NEWS. 22 October 2020. Retrieved 11 December 2021. A Tory MP has quit her junior government role... Caroline Ansell resigned as a parliamentary private secretary to the environment secretary

^ "Six MPs could quit Government in Covid restrictions rebellion". Daily Telegraph. 10 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. As many as six MPs could quit as members of the Government next week... The Telegraph has learned that at least six parliamentary private secretaries are preparing to defy Boris Johnson and vote against elements of his "Plan B" restrictions

^ "Chris Green quits as junior government member over Bolton local lockdown". LBC NEWS. 13 October 2020. Retrieved 11 December 2021. A junior government member has resigned over the local lockdown in Bolton... Bolton West Conservative MP Chris Green has stepped down as a parliamentary private secretary (PPS)


Footnotes


^ or His Majesty's Government as appropriate; also referred to as the British Government or the UK Government. The latter translated as in Welsh: Llywodraeth y Deyrnas Unedig or Llywodraeth y DU for short in Wales.


External links[edit]
Official website 
Official website of 10 Downing Street
UK Government list of ministers from GOV.UK
How Government works overview from GOV.UK
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox th,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output th.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteList of current heads of government in the United KingdomHer Majesty's GovernmentMajorityConservativePrime MinisterBoris Johnson (Conservative)Northern Ireland ExecutivePower-sharingDUP / Sinn Féin / SDLP / UUP / APNIFirst MinisterPaul Givan (DUP)Deputy First MinisterMichelle O'Neill (Sinn Féin)Scottish GovernmentMajority (Confidence and supply)Scottish National Party / Scottish Green PartyFirst MinisterNicola Sturgeon (SNP)Welsh GovernmentMinorityLabourFirst MinisterMark Drakeford (Labour)Heads of governments of British Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies
vte Departments of the Government of the United KingdomMinisterial
Advocate General for Scotland
Attorney General's Office
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
Cabinet Office
Defence
Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
Education
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development
Health and Social Care
Home
International Trade
Justice
Leader of the House of Commons
Leader of the House of Lords
Levelling Up, Housing and Communities
Northern Ireland
Scotland Office
Transport
Treasury
UK Export Finance
Wales Office
Work and Pensions
Non-ministerial
Charity Commission for England and Wales
Competition and Markets Authority
Crown Prosecution Service
Food Standards Agency
Forestry Commission
Government Actuary's Department
Government Legal Department
Land Registry
Revenue and Customs
National Crime Agency
National Savings and Investments
Ofsted
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets
Ofqual
Office of Rail and Road
Serious Fraud Office
Supreme Court
National Archives
UK Statistics Authority
Ofwat

 Category
 Commons

vteBritish–Irish CouncilGood Friday AgreementMember jurisdictions
 United Kingdom
 Ireland
 Guernsey
 Isle of Man
 Jersey
 Northern Ireland
 Scotland
 Wales
Member bodies
Government of the United Kingdom
Government of Ireland
Policy and Resources Committee of Guernsey
Isle of Man Government
Government of Jersey
Northern Ireland Executive
Scottish Government
Welsh Government
Work areas
Demography
eHealth
Environment
Indigenous, minority and lesser-used languages
Knowledge economy
Misuse of drugs
Social inclusion
Tourism
Transport
Representatives of states
 Prime Minister
 Taoiseach
 President of the Policy and Resources Committee
 Chief Minister
 Chief Minister
 First Minister and deputy First Minister
 First Minister
 First Minister

vteGovernments of EuropeSovereign states
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

Italy
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Moldova
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Wales
Vatican City
States with limitedrecognition
Abkhazia
Artsakh
Kosovo
Northern Cyprus
South Ossetia
Transnistria
Dependencies andother entities
Åland
Faroe Islands
Gibraltar
Guernsey
Isle of Man
Jersey
Svalbard
Other entities
European Union

vteUnited Kingdom articlesHistoryChronology
Formation
Georgian era
Victorian era
Edwardian era
First World War
Interwar
Second World War
civilian
military
Postwar
political
social
Since 1979
political
social
By topic
Economic
Empire
Foreign relations
1814–1919
Maritime
Military
GeographyAdministrative
Counties of the United Kingdom
Countries of the United Kingdom
Crown Dependencies
Overseas territories
City status
Towns
Former colonies
Physical
British Isles
terminology
Great Britain
Coastline
Geology
Lakes and lochs
Mountains
Rivers
Volcanoes
Resources
Agriculture
Energy/Renewable energy
biodiesel
coal
geothermal
hydraulic frac.
hydroelectricity
marine
North Sea oil
solar
wind
Fishing
English
Scottish
Hunting
Materials
flora
forestry
mining
Politics
Constitution
Devolution
Elections
Foreign relations
Human rights
Judiciary
Law
Law enforcement
Monarchy
monarchs
Nationality
Parliament
House of Commons
House of Lords
Political parties
Female party leaders
Political scandals
Shadow Cabinet
Government
Cabinet
list
Civil service
Departments
Ministers
list
Prime Minister
list
Military
Royal Navy
Army
Royal Air Force
Weapons of mass destruction
Economy
Banks
Bank of England
Budget
Economic geography
Manufacturing
Pound (currency)
Science and technology
Stock exchanges (London Exchange)
Taxation
Telecommunications
Tourism
Transport
Rail transport in the United Kingdom
Society
Affordability of housing
Crime
Demography
Drug policy
Education
Ethnic groups
Health
Immigration
Innovation
Languages
Poverty
Prostitution
Public holidays
Racism
Social care
Social class
Culture
Art
Cinema
Cuisine
Cultural icons
Identity
Literature
Media
Music
Religion
Sport
Symbols
Theatre
Stereotypes of the British
World Heritage Sites
Anglosphere
Countries of the United KingdomEngland
History
social
timeline
Geography
Politics
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
Northern Ireland
History
Geography
Politics
Assembly
Executive
First Minister and deputy
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
Scotland
History
timeline
Geography
Politics
Parliament
Government
First Minister
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
Wales
History
Geography
Politics
Senedd
Government
First Minister
Law
Economy
tourism
Education
Health care
Culture
Religion
Symbols
.mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal}OutlineIndex
Category
Portal
Authority control General
ISNI
1
VIAF
1
WorldCat
National libraries
United States
Art galleries and museums
Te Papa (New Zealand)
Other
Microsoft Academic






Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Government_of_the_United_Kingdom&oldid=1059752849"
		Categories: Government of the United KingdomConstitution of the United KingdomExecutive branches of governmentWestminster system governmentsEuropean governmentsHidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodicalWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknownArticles containing Welsh-language textArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse British English from July 2020Use dmy dates from January 2017Articles containing Irish-language textArticles containing Scots-language textArticles containing potentially dated statements from July 2019All articles containing potentially dated statementsArticles with ISNI identifiersArticles with VIAF identifiersArticles with WORLDCATID identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with TePapa identifiersArticles with MA identifiers
	