
		From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
		
		
		
		
		Jump to navigation
		Jump to search
		Constructing a product by means of computer
.mw-parser-output .hatnote{font-style:italic}.mw-parser-output div.hatnote{padding-left:1.6em;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .hatnote i{font-style:normal}.mw-parser-output .hatnote+link+.hatnote{margin-top:-0.5em}"CAD" and "CADD" redirect here. For the currency, see Canadian dollar. For other uses, see Cad (disambiguation) and CADD (disambiguation).
  Example: 2D CAD drawing
  Example: 3D CAD model
Computer-aided design (CAD) is the use of computers (or .mw-parser-output .vanchor>:target~.vanchor-text{background-color:#b1d2ff}workstations) to aid in the creation, modification, analysis, or optimization of a design.[1] This software is used to increase the productivity of the designer, improve the quality of design, improve communications through documentation, and to create a database for manufacturing.[2] Designs made through CAD software are helpful in protecting products and inventions when used in patent applications. CAD output is often in the form of electronic files for  print, machining, or other manufacturing operations. The term CADD (for computer aided design and drafting) is also used.[3]
Its use in designing electronic systems is known as electronic design automation (EDA). In mechanical design it is known as mechanical design automation (MDA) or computer-aided drafting (CAD), which includes the process of creating a technical drawing with the use of computer software.[4]
CAD software for mechanical design uses either vector-based graphics to depict the objects of traditional drafting, or may also produce raster graphics showing the overall appearance of designed objects. However, it involves more than just shapes. As in the manual drafting of technical and engineering drawings, the output of CAD must convey information, such as materials, processes, dimensions, and tolerances, according to application-specific conventions.
CAD may be used to design curves and figures in two-dimensional (2D) space; or curves, surfaces, and solids in three-dimensional (3D) space.[5]
CAD is an important industrial art extensively used in many applications, including automotive, shipbuilding, and aerospace industries, industrial and architectural design, prosthetics, and many more. CAD is also widely used to produce computer animation for special effects in movies, advertising and technical manuals, often called DCC digital content creation. The modern ubiquity and power of computers means that even perfume bottles and shampoo dispensers are designed using techniques unheard of by engineers of the 1960s. Because of its enormous economic importance, CAD has been a major driving force for research in computational geometry, computer graphics (both hardware and software), and discrete differential geometry.[6]
The design of geometric models for object shapes, in particular, is occasionally called computer-aided geometric design (CAGD).[7]

Contents

1 History
2 Overview of CAD software
3 Uses
4 Types
5 Technology
6 Software

6.1 Commercial
6.2 Freeware
6.3 Open-source
6.4 CAD kernels


7 See also
8 References
9 External links



History[edit]
See also: History of CAD software
Overview of CAD software[edit]
Starting around the mid-1960s, with the IBM Drafting System, computer-aided design systems began to provide more capability than just an ability to reproduce manual drafting with electronic drafting, the cost-benefit for companies to switch to  CAD became apparent. The benefits of CAD systems over manual drafting are the capabilities one often takes for granted from computer systems today;  automated generation of bills of materials, auto layout in integrated circuits, interference checking, and many others. Eventually, CAD provided the designer with the ability to perform engineering calculations. During this transition, calculations were still performed either by hand or by those individuals who could run computer programs. CAD was a revolutionary change in the engineering industry, where draftsmen, designers, and engineering roles begin to merge. It did not eliminate departments as much as it merged departments and empowered draftsmen, designers, and engineers. CAD is an example of the pervasive effect computers were beginning to have on the industry.
Current computer-aided design software packages range from 2D vector-based drafting systems to 3D solid and surface modelers. Modern CAD packages can also frequently allow rotations in three dimensions, allowing viewing of a designed object from any desired angle, even from the inside looking out. Some CAD software is capable of dynamic mathematical modeling.
CAD technology is used in the design of tools and machinery and in the drafting and design of all types of buildings, from small residential types (houses) to the largest commercial and industrial structures (hospitals and factories).[8]
CAD is mainly used for detailed engineering of 3D models or 2D drawings of physical components, but it is also used throughout the engineering process from conceptual design and layout of products, through strength and dynamic analysis of assemblies to definition of manufacturing methods of components. It can also be used to design objects such as jewelry, furniture, appliances, etc. Furthermore, many CAD applications now offer advanced rendering and animation capabilities so engineers can better visualize their product designs. 4D BIM is a type of virtual construction engineering simulation incorporating time or schedule-related information for project management.
CAD has become an especially important technology within the scope of computer-aided technologies, with benefits such as lower product development costs and a greatly shortened design cycle. CAD enables designers to layout and develop work on screen, print it out and save it for future editing, saving time on their drawings.

Uses[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (January 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Computer-aided design is one of the many tools used by engineers and designers and is used in many ways depending on the profession of the user and the type of software in question.
CAD is one part of the whole digital product development (DPD) activity within the product lifecycle management (PLM) processes, and as such is used together with other tools, which are either integrated modules or stand-alone products, such as:

Computer-aided engineering (CAE) and finite element analysis (FEA, FEM)
Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) including instructions to computer numerical control (CNC) machines
Photorealistic rendering and motion simulation.
Document management and revision control using product data management (PDM)
CAD is also used for the accurate creation of photo simulations that are often required in the preparation of environmental impact reports, in which computer-aided designs of intended buildings are superimposed into photographs of existing environments to represent what that locale will be like, where the proposed facilities are allowed to be built. Potential blockage of view corridors and shadow studies are also frequently analyzed through the use of CAD.[9]
CAD has been proven to be useful to engineers as well. Using four properties which are history, features, parameterization, and high-level constraints. The construction history can be used to look back into the model's personal features and work on the single area rather than the whole model. Parameters and constraints can be used to determine the size, shape, and other properties of the different modeling elements. The features in the CAD system can be used for the variety of tools for measurement such as tensile strength, yield strength, electrical, or electromagnetic properties. Also its stress, strain, timing, or how the element gets affected in certain temperatures, etc.

Types[edit]
  A simple procedure of recreating a solid model out of 2D sketches.
See also: Comparison of computer-aided design editors
There are several different types of CAD,[10] each requiring the operator to think differently about how to use them and design their virtual components in a different manner for each.
There are many producers of the lower-end 2D systems, including a number of free and open-source programs. These provide an approach to the drawing process without all the fuss over scale and placement on the drawing sheet that accompanied hand drafting since these can be adjusted as required during the creation of the final draft.
3D wireframe is basically an extension of 2D drafting (not often used today). Each line has to be manually inserted into the drawing. The final product has no mass properties associated with it and cannot have features directly add to it, such as holes. The operator approaches these in a similar fashion to the 2D systems, although many 3D systems allow using the wireframe model to make the final engineering drawing views.
3D "dumb" solids are created in a way analogous to manipulations of real-world objects (not often used today). Basic three-dimensional geometric forms (prisms, cylinders, spheres, rectangle) have solid volumes added or subtracted from them as if assembling or cutting real-world objects. Two-dimensional projected views can easily be generated from the models. Basic 3D solids don't usually includes tools to easily allow the motion of the components, set there limits to their motion, or identify interference between components.
There are two types of 3D solid modeling

Parametric modeling allows the operator to use what is referred to as "design intent". The objects and features are created modifiable. Any future modifications can be made by changing on how the original part was created. If a feature was intended to be located from the center of the part, the operator should locate it from the center of the model. The feature could be located using any geometric object already available in the part, but this random placement would defeat the design intent. If the operator designs the part as it functions the parametric modeler is able to make changes to the part while maintaining geometric and functional relationships.
Direct or explicit modeling provide the ability to edit geometry without a history tree With direct modeling, once a sketch is used to create geometry the sketch is incorporated into the new geometry and the designer just modifies the geometry without needing the original sketch. As with parametric modeling, direct modeling has the ability to include the relationships between selected geometry (e.g., tangency, concentricity).
The top-end systems offer the capabilities to incorporate more organic, aesthetic and ergonomic features into the designs. Freeform surface modeling is often combined with solids to allow the designer to create products that fit the human form and visual requirements as well as they interface with the machine.

Technology[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (January 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
  A CAD model of a computer mouse
Originally software for CAD systems was developed with computer languages such as Fortran, ALGOL but with the advancement of object-oriented programming methods this has radically changed. Typical modern parametric feature-based modeler and freeform surface systems are built around a number of key C modules with their own APIs. A CAD system can be seen as built up from the interaction of a graphical user interface (GUI) with NURBS geometry or boundary representation (B-rep) data via a geometric modeling kernel. A geometry constraint engine may also be employed to manage the associative relationships between geometry, such as wireframe geometry in a sketch or components in an assembly.
Unexpected capabilities of these associative relationships have led to a new form of prototyping called digital prototyping. In contrast to physical prototypes, which entail manufacturing time in the design. That said, CAD models can be generated by a computer after the physical prototype has been scanned using an industrial CT scanning machine. Depending on the nature of the business, digital or physical prototypes can be initially chosen according to specific needs.
Today, CAD systems exist for all the major platforms (Windows, Linux, UNIX and Mac OS X); some packages support multiple platforms.[11]
Currently, no special hardware is required for most CAD software. However, some CAD systems can do graphically and computationally intensive tasks, so a modern graphics card, high speed (and possibly multiple) CPUs and large amounts of RAM may be recommended.
The human-machine interface is generally via a computer mouse but can also be via a pen and digitizing graphics tablet. Manipulation of the view of the model on the screen is also sometimes done with the use of a Spacemouse/SpaceBall. Some systems also support stereoscopic glasses for viewing the 3D model. Technologies which in the past were limited to larger installations or specialist applications have become available to a wide group of users. These include the CAVE or HMDs and interactive devices like motion-sensing technology

Software[edit]
CAD software enables engineers and architects to design, inspect and manage engineering projects within an integrated graphical user interface (GUI) on a personal computer system. Most applications support solid modeling with boundary representation (B-Rep) and NURBS geometry, and enable the same to be published in a variety of formats. A geometric modeling kernel is a software component that provides solid modeling and surface modeling features to CAD applications.
Based on market statistics, commercial software from Autodesk, Dassault Systems, Siemens PLM Software, and PTC dominate the CAD industry.[12][13] The following is a list of major CAD applications, grouped by usage statistics.[14]

.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
Commercial[edit]
AC3D
Alibre Design
ArchiCAD (Graphisoft)
AutoCAD (Autodesk)
Autodesk Inventor
AxSTREAM
BricsCAD
CATIA (Dassault Systèmes)
Cobalt
CorelCAD
Fusion 360 (Autodesk)
IntelliCAD
IRONCAD
KeyCreator (Kubotek)
MEDUSA
MicroStation (Bentley Systems)
Modelur (AgiliCity)
Onshape
Promine
PTC Creo (successor to Pro/ENGINEER)
PunchCAD
Remo 3D
Rhinoceros 3D
Siemens NX
SketchUp
Solid Edge (Siemens)
SolidWorks (Dassault Systèmes)
SpaceClaim
T-FLEX CAD
TurboCAD
Vectorworks (Nemetschek)
Freeware[edit]
BricsCAD Shape
Tinkercad (successor to Autodesk 123D)
Open-source[edit]
BRL-CAD
FreeCAD
LibreCAD
OpenSCAD
QCAD
Salome (software)
SolveSpace
CAD kernels[edit]
ACIS by Spatial
C3D Toolkit by C3D Labs
Open CASCADE Open Source
Parasolid by Siemens
ShapeManager by Autodesk

See also[edit]

3D computer graphics
3D printing
Additive Manufacturing File Format
Algorithmic art
CAD standards
Coarse space (numerical analysis)
Comparison of 3D computer graphics software
Comparison of CAD, CAM, and CAE file viewers
Comparison of computer-aided design software
Comparison of EDA software (Electronic Design Automation)
Computer-aided industrial design
Digital architecture
Electronic design automation
Engineering optimization
Finite element method
ISO 128
ISO 10303 (STEP)
Model-based definition
Molecular design software
Open-source hardware
Rapid prototyping
Responsive computer-aided design
Space mapping
Surrogate model
System integration
Virtual prototyping
Virtual reality

References[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}Narayan, K. Lalit (2008). Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing. New Delhi: Prentice Hall of India. p. 3. ISBN 978-8120333420.

^ Narayan, K. Lalit (2008). Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing. New Delhi: Prentice Hall of India. p. 4. ISBN 978-8120333420.

^ Duggal, Vijay (2000). Cadd Primer: A General Guide to Computer Aided Design and Drafting-Cadd, CAD. Mailmax Pub. ISBN 978-0962916595.

^ Madsen, David A. (2012). Engineering Drawing & Design. Clifton Park, NY: Delmar. p. 10. ISBN 978-1111309572.

^ Farin, Gerald; Hoschek, Josef; Kim, Myung-Soo (2002). Handbook of computer aided geometric design [electronic resource]. Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-444-51104-1.

^ Pottmann, H.; Brell-Cokcan, S. and Wallner, J. (2007) "Discrete surfaces for architectural design" Archived 2009-08-12 at the Wayback Machine, pp. 213–234 in Curve and Surface Design, Patrick Chenin, Tom Lyche and Larry L. Schumaker (eds.), Nashboro Press, ISBN 978-0-9728482-7-5.

^ Farin, Gerald (2002) Curves and Surfaces for CAGD: A Practical Guide, Morgan-Kaufmann, ISBN 1-55860-737-4.

^ Jennifer Herron (2010). "3D Model-Based Design: Setting the Definitions Straight". MCADCafe.

^ "Computer-Aided Design (CAD) and Computer-Aided Manufacturing (CAM)". Inc.com. Retrieved 2020-04-30.

^ "3D Feature-based, Parametric Solid Modeling". engineershandbook.com. Archived from the original on 2012-11-18. Retrieved 2012-03-01.

^ "What is a CAD Workstation? Definition, Uses and More". Computer Tech Reviews. 2019-11-21. Retrieved 2020-04-30.

^ The Big 6 in CAD/CAE/PLM software industry (2011), CAEWatch, September 12, 2011

^ van Kooten, Michel (2011-08-23). "GLOBAL SOFTWARE TOP 100 – EDITION 2011". Software Top 100.

^ List of mechanical CAD softwares, BeyondMech


External links[edit]
MIT 1982 CAD lab
 Learning materials related to Computer-aided design at Wikiversity
 Learning materials related to Computer-aided Geometric Design at Wikiversity
 Media related to Computer-aided design at Wikimedia Commons
 The dictionary definition of computer-aided design at Wiktionary
.mw-parser-output .navbox{box-sizing:border-box;border:1px solid #a2a9b1;width:100%;clear:both;font-size:88%;text-align:center;padding:1px;margin:1em auto 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbox{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox+.navbox-styles+.navbox{margin-top:-1px}.mw-parser-output .navbox-inner,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{width:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title,.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow{padding:0.25em 1em;line-height:1.5em;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .navbox-group{white-space:nowrap;text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .navbox,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup{background-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list{line-height:1.5em;border-color:#fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox-list-with-group{text-align:left;border-left-width:2px;border-left-style:solid}.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-image,.mw-parser-output tr+tr>.navbox-list{border-top:2px solid #fdfdfd}.mw-parser-output .navbox th,.mw-parser-output .navbox-title{}.mw-parser-output .navbox-abovebelow,.mw-parser-output th.navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-title{background-color:#ddf}.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-group,.mw-parser-output .navbox-subgroup .navbox-abovebelow{background-color:#e6e6ff}.mw-parser-output .navbox-even{background-color:#f7f7f7}.mw-parser-output .navbox-odd{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox .hlist td ul,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist dl,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ol,.mw-parser-output .navbox td.hlist ul{padding:0.125em 0}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar a>span,.mw-parser-output .navbar a>abbr{text-decoration:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteCAD softwareFree and open-sourceMechanical
BRL-CAD
FreeCAD
HeeksCAD
LibreCAD
Open Cascade Technology
OpenSCAD
QCAD
Salome
SolveSpace
Electrical
Electric
FreePCB
Fritzing
gEDA
KiCad
kTechLab
Magic
ngspice
Oregano
QUCS
XCircuit
ProprietaryMechanical
Alibre Design
AutoCAD
Autodesk Alias
Autodesk Inventor
Autodesk Revit
ArchiCAD
ARES CAD
BricsCAD
CADKEY
CATIA
Cimatron
Cobalt
DesignSpark Mechanical
Creo Elements/Direct Drafting
Creo Elements/Pro
FastCAD/EasyCAD
FINE
FORAN
GstarCAD
IRONCAD
KeyCreator
MEDUSA
MicroStation
NX
Onshape
PDMS
Pro/DESKTOP
Rhinoceros 3D
Grasshopper 3D
RUCAPS
Solid Edge
SolidWorks
SpaceClaim
T-FLEX CAD
TurboCAD
VariCAD
Electrical
Allegro
AutoCAD Electrical
Autotrax
Altium Designer
BoardStation
CADSTAR
CR-2000
CR-3000
CR-5000
CR-8000
Delta Design
DesignSpark PCB
DesignSpark PCB Pro
DipTrace
EAGLE
Easytrax
FreeStyle
IntegraStation
LTspice
Micro-Cap
Multisim
OrCAD
Protel
Proteus
Pulsonix
SolidWorks Electrical
Tango
TARGET
TopoR
Ultiboard
Upverter
Xpedition
File formats
3MF
ACIS
AMF
C3D
CKD
DSN
DWF
DWFX
DWG
DXF
IGES
OBJ
OpenDWG
PLY
PSpice
SES
STEP
STL
Modeling kernels
ACIS
C3D
Open Cascade Technology
Parasolid
 RGK
Romulus
KernelCAD
ShapeManager
Teigha
IntelliCAD
SMLib
OldDAC-1 (1963) · Sketchpad (1963) · UNISURF (1968)History of CAD software
vteBuilding information modeling (BIM)Companies
Archibus
Autodesk
Bentley Systems
BuildingSMART
Cadwork informatik AG
GRAITEC
Nemetschek (* Data Design System * Graphisoft * Vectorworks)
Open Design Alliance
Trimble (* Tekla)
Free open-source
FreeCAD
Softwarecurrent
Allplan
ArchiCAD
AutoCAD
Autodesk Revit
BricsCAD
cadwork
CodeBook
DDS-CAD
Digital Project
FINE MEP
FreeCAD
GRAITEC Advance
MicroStation
Navisworks
OpenStudio
RFEM
Parabuild
Tekla BIMsight
Tekla Structures
Trimble SketchUp
TSteel 3D
Vectorworks
VisualARQ
historic
Gable CAD
Reflex
RUCAPS
Sonata
Related topics
3D BIM
4D BIM
5D BIM
6D BIM
BIM Task Group
Centre for Digital Built Britain
Computer-aided design
COBie
Geometric modeling kernel
Industry Foundation Classes
BIM Collaboration Format

vteDesign
Outline
Designer
DisciplinesCommunicationdesign
Advertising
Book design
Brand design
Exhibit design
Film title design
Graphic design
Motion
Postage stamp design
Print design
Illustration
Information design
Instructional design
News design
Photography
Retail design
Signage / Traffic sign design
Typography / Type design
Video design
Visual merchandising
Environmentaldesign
Architecture
Architectural lighting design
Building design
Passive solar
Ecological design
Environmental impact design
Garden design
Computer-aided
Healthy community design
Hotel design
Interior architecture
Interior design
EID
Keyline design
Landscape architecture
Sustainable
Landscape design
Spatial design
Urban design
Industrialdesign
Automotive design
Automotive suspension design
CMF design
Corrugated box design
Electric guitar design
Furniture design
Sustainable
Hardware interface design
Motorcycle design
Packaging and labeling
Photographic lens design
Product design
Production design
Sensory design
Service design
Interactiondesign
Experience design
EED
Game design
Level design
Video game design
Hardware interface design
Icon design
Immersive design
Information design
Sonic interaction design
User experience design
User interface design
Web design
Otherapplied arts
Public art design
Ceramic / glass design
Fashion design
Costume design
Jewellery design
Floral design
Game art design
Property design
Scenic design
Sound design
Stage/set lighting design
Textile design
Otherdesign& engineering
Algorithm design
Behavioural design
Boiler design
Database design
Drug design
Electrical system design
Experimental design
Filter design
Geometric design
Work design
Integrated circuit design
Circuit design
Physical design
Power network design
Mechanism design
Nuclear weapon design
Nucleic acid design
Organization design
Process design
Processor design
Protein design
Research design
Social design
Software design
Spacecraft design
Strategic design
Systems design
Approaches
Activity-centered
Adaptive web
Affective
Brainstorming
By committee
By contract
C-K theory
Closure
Co-design
Concept-oriented
Configuration
Contextual
Continuous
Cradle-to-cradle
Creative problem-solving
Creativity techniques
Critical
Design fiction
Defensive
Design–bid–build
Design–build
architect-led
Diffuse
Domain-driven
Ecological design
Energy neutral
Engineering design process
Probabilistic design
Error-tolerant
Fault-tolerant
Framework-oriented
For assembly
For behaviour change
For manufacturability
For Six Sigma
For testing
For X
Functional
Generative
Geodesign
HCD
High-level
Inclusive
Integrated
Integrated topside
Intelligence-based
Iterative
KISS principle
Low-level
Metadesign
Mind mapping
Modular
New Wave
Object-oriented
Open
Parametric
Participatory
Platform-based
Policy-based
Process-centered
Public interest
Rational
Regenerative
Reliability engineering
Research-based
Responsibility-driven
RWD
Safe-life
Sustainable
Systemic
SOD
Tableless web
Theory of constraints
Top-down and bottom-up
Transformation
Transgenerational
TRIZ
Universal
Design for All
Usage-centered
Use-centered
User-centered
Empathic
User innovation
Value-driven
Value sensitive
Privacy by
Design choice
computing
controls
culture
flow
leadership
management
marker
methods
pattern
research
science
sprint
strategy
theory
thinking
ToolsIntellectual propertyOrganizationsAwardsTools
AAD
Architectural model
Blueprint
Comprehensive layout
CAD
CAID
Virtual home design software
CAutoD
Design quality indicator
Electronic design automation
Flowchart
Mockup
Design specification
Prototype
Sketch
Storyboard
Technical drawing
HTML editor
Website wireframe
Intellectualproperty
Community design
Design around
Design infringement
Design patent
Fashion design copyright
Geschmacksmuster
Industrial design rights
European Union
Organizations
American Institute of Graphic Arts
Chartered Society of Designers
Design and Industries Association
Design Council
International Forum Design
The Design Society
Design Research Society
Awards
European Design Award
German Design Award
Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art)
Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum)
Graphex
IF Product Design Award
James Dyson Award
Prince Philip Designers Prize
Related topics
Aesthetics
Agile
Concept art
Conceptual design
Creative industries
Cultural icon
.design
Enterprise architecture
Form factor
Futures studies
Indie design
Innovation management
Intelligent design
Lean startup
New product development
OODA loop
Philosophy of design
Process simulation
Slow design
STEAM fields
Unintelligent design
Visualization
Wicked problem
Design brief
change
classic
competition
architectural
student
director
education
elements and principles
engineer
firm
history
knowledge
language
life
load
museum
paradigm
rationale
review
specification
studies
studio
technology

 Commons    
 Wikibooks  
 Wikinews   
 Wikiquote  
 Wikisource 
 Wiktionary 

Authority control General
Integrated Authority File (Germany)
National libraries
United States
Japan
Other
Microsoft Academic






Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer-aided_design&oldid=1054671193"
		Categories: Computer-aided designComputer-aided design softwareDesign engineeringHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from January 2020All articles needing additional referencesCommons category link from WikidataArticles with GND identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with MA identifiers
	